A LOGICAL CALCULUS OF THE
IDEAS IMMANENT IN NERVOUS ACTIVITY

Warren S. McCu.Locy and Water H, Prrrs

Because of the “all-or-none” character of nervous activity,
neural events and the relations among them can be treated by
means of propositional logic. It is found that the behavior of
every net can be described in these terms, with the addition of
more complicated logical means for nets containing circles; and
that for any logical expression satisfying certain conditions, one
can find a net behaving in the fashion it describes. It is shown
that many particular choices among possible neurophysiological
assumptions are equivalent, in the sense that for every net be-
having under one assumption, there exists another net which
behaves under the other and gives the same results, although
perhaps not in the same time. Various applications of the calculus
are discussed.

INTRODUCTION

“Toeoreticat neurophysiology rests on certain cardinal as-
sumptions. The nervous system is a net of neurons, each having a
soma and an axon. Their adjunctions, or synapses, are always be-
tween the axon of one neuron and the soma of another. At any in-
stant a neuron has some threshold, which excitation must exceed to
initiate an impulse. This, except for the fact and the time of its
occurrence, is determined by the neuron, not by the excitation.
From the point of excitation the impulse is propagated to all parts
of the neuron. The velocity along the axon varies directly with its
diameter, from less than one meter per second in thin axons,
which are usually short, to more than 150 meters per second in
thick axons, which are usually long. The time for axonal conduc-
tion is consequently of little importance in determining the time

Q@iadenker

Winter-Edition 2008

originally published in: Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, Vol. 5, 1943, p. 115-133

A Logical Caiculus of Ideas immanent in Nervous Activity

of arrival of impulses at points unequally remote from the same
source. Excitation across synapses occurs predominantly from
axonal terminations to somata. It is still a moot point whether
this depends upon irreciprocity of individual synapses or merely
upon prevalent anatomical configurations. To suppose the latter
requires no hypothesis ad hoc and explains known exceptions, but
any assumption as to cause is compatible with the calculus to
come. No case is known in which excitation through a single syn-
apse has elicited a nervous impulse in any neuron, whereas any
neuron may be excited by impulses arriving at a sufficient number
of neighboring synapses within the period of latent addition, which
lasts less than one quarter of a millisecond. Observed temporal
summation of impulses at greater intervals is impossible for single
neurons and empirically depends upon structural properties of the
net. Between the arrival of impulses upon a neuron and its own
propagated impulse there is a synaptic delay of more than half
a millisecond. During the first part of the nervous impulse the
neuron is absolutely refractory to any stimulation. Thereafter its
excitability returns rapidly, in some cases reaching a value above
normal from which it sinks again to a subnormal value, whence
it returns slowly to normal. Frequent activity augments this sub-
normality. Such specificity as is possessed by nervous impulses
depends solely upon their time and place and not on any other
specificity of nervous energies. Of late only inhibition has been
seriously adduced to contravene this thesis. Inhibition is the ter-
mination or prevention of the activity of one group of neurons by
concurrent or antecedent activity of a second group. Until recently
this could be explained on the supposition that previous activity
of neurons of the second group might so raise the thresholds of
internuncia! neurons that they could no longer be excited by
neurons of the first group, whereas the impulses of the first group
must sum with the impulses of these internuncials to excite the
now inhibited neurons. Today, some inhibitions have been shown
to consume less than one millisecond. This excludes internuncials
and requires synapses through which impulses inhibit that neuron
which is being stimulated by impulses through other synapses.
As yet experiment has not shown whether the refractoriness is
relative or absolute. We will assume the latter and demonstrate

A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity

that the difference is immaterial to our argument. Either variety
of refractoriness can be accounted for in either of two ways. The
“inhibitory synapse” may be of such a kind as to produce a sub-
stance which raises the threshold of the neuron, or it may be so
placed that the local disturbance produced by its excitation
opposes the alteration induced by the otherwise excitatory syn-
apses. Inasmuch as position is already known to have such effects
in the case of electrical stimulation, the first hypothesis is to be
excluded unless and until it be substantiated, for the second
involves no new hypothesis. We have, then, two explanations of
inhibition based on the same general premises, differing only in
the assumed nervous nets and, consequently, in the time required
for inhibition. Hereafter we shall refer to such nervous nets as
equivalent in the extended sense. Since we are concerned with properties
of nets which are invariant under equivalence, we may make the
physical assumptions which are most convenient for the calculus.

Many years ago one of us, by considerations impertinent to
this argument, was led to conceive of the response of any neuron
as factually equivalent to a proposition which proposed its ade-
quate stimulus. He therefore attempted to record the behavior of
complicated nets in the notation of the symbolic logic of proposi-
tions. The “‘all-or-none” law of nervous activity is sufficient to
insure that the activity of any neuron may be represented as a
proposition. Physiological relations existing among nervous activ-
ities correspond, of course, to relations among the propositions;
and the utility of the representation depends upon the identity
of these relations with those of the logic of propositions. T’o each
reaction of any neuron there is a corresponding assertion of a
simple proposition. This, in turn, implies either some other simple
proposition or the disjunction or the conjunction, with or without
negation, of similar propositions, according to the configuration
of the synapses upon and the threshold of the neuron in question.
Two difficulties appeared. The first concerns facilitation and ex-
tinction, in which antecedent activity temporarily alters responsive-
ness to subsequent stimulation of one and the same part of the
net. The second concerns learning, in which activities concurrent
at some previous time have altered the net permanently, so that
a stimulus which would previously have been inadequate is now

A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity

adequate. But for nets undergoing both alterations, we can sub-
stitute equivalent fictitious nets composed of neurons whose con-
nections and thresholds are unaltered. But one point must be
made clear: neither of us conceives the formal equivalence to be
a factual explanation. Per contra/—we regard facilitation and
extinction as dependent upon continuous changes in threshold
related to electrical and chemical variables, such as after-potentials
and ionic concentrations; and learning as an enduring change
which can survive sleep, anaesthesia, convulsions and coma. ‘The
importance of the formal equivalence lies in this: that the altera-
tions actually underlying facilitation, extinction and learning in
no way affect the conclusions which follow from the formal treat-
ment of the activity of nervous nets, and the relations of the
corresponding propositions remain those of the logic of propositions.

The nervous system contains many circular paths, whose ac-
tivity so regenerates the excitation of any participant neuron that
reference to time past becomes indefinite, although it still implies
that afferent activity has realized one of a certain class of con-
figurations over time. Precise specification of these implications
by means of recursive functions, and determination of those that
can be embodied in the activity of nervous nets, completes the
theory.

THE THEORY: NETS WITHOUT CIRCLES

We shall make the following physical assumptions for our cal-
culus.

1. The activity of the neuron is an “all-or-none”’ process.

2. A certain fixed number of synapses must be excited within
the period of latent addition in order to excite a neuron at any
time, and this number is independent of previous activity and
position on the neuron.

3. The only significant delay within the nervous system is syn-
aptic delay.

4. The activity of any inhibitory synapse absolutely prevents
excitation of the neuron at that time.

5. The structure of the net does not change with time.

A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity

To present the theory, the most appropriate symbolism is that
of Language II of R. Carnap (1938), augmented with various
notations drawn from B. Russell and A. N. Whitehead (1927),
including the Principia conventions for dots. Typographical neces-
sity, however, will compel us to use the upright ‘Z” for the existen-
tial operator instead of the inverted, and an arrow (‘—’) for
implication instead of the horseshoe. We shall also use the Carnap
syntactical notations, but print them in boldface rather than
German type; and we shall introduce a functor S, whose value
for a property P is the property which holds of a number when P
holds of its predecessor; it is defined by ‘S(P) (t). = .P(Kx).t =)’;
the brackets around its argument will often be omitted, in which
case this is understood to be the nearest predicate-expression [Pr]
on the right. Moreover, we shall write S?Pr for S(S(Pr)), etc.

The neurons of a given net Sl may be assigned designations
‘er’, “¢a’, ... , “Gy”. This done, we shall denote the property of a
number, that a neuron ¢; fires at a time which is that number of
synaptic delays from the origin of time, by ‘N’ with the numeral
1 as subscript, so that N,(¢) asserts that c; fires at the time ¢. N; is
called the action of c;. We shall sometimes regard the subscripted
numeral of ‘N’ as if it belonged to the object-language, and were
in a place for a functoral argument, so that it might be replaced
by a number-variable [z] and quantified; this enables us to abbre-
viate long but finite disjunctions and conjunctions by the use of
an operator. We shall employ this locution quite generally for
sequences of Pr; it may be secured formally by an obvious dis-
junctive definition. The predicates ‘NM’, ‘N?, ... , comprise the
syntactical class ‘N’.

Let us define the peripheral afferents of Si as the neurons of %
with no axons synapsing upon them. Let M, ... , Np denote the
actions of such neurons and Npii, Npi2, »-- , N, those of the rest.
Then a solution of 2 will be a class of sentences of the form S;,:
Now (21) «=. Pri (M, No, ..., Np, 21), where Pr; contains no
free variable save z; and no descriptive symbols save the N in the
argument [Arg], and possibly some constant sentences [sa]; and
such that each S; is true of 9. Conversely, given a Pr; (ip, he, wey
1p\,, 21,8), containing no free variable save those in its Arg, we
shall say that it is realizable in the narrow sense if there exists a net Dl

A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity

and a series of N; in it such that M (a1) .=. Pn (M, Ne, ...,
Z,, $@) is true of it, where sa, has the form N(Q). We shall call it
realizable in the extended sense, or simply realizable, if for some n S"( Pr)
(A, «++, Pp, 21, S) is realizable in the above sense. ¢,; is here the
realizing neuron. We shall say of two laws of nervous excitation
which are such that every S which is realizable in either sense
upon one supposition is also realizable, perhaps by a different
net, upon the other, that they are equivalent assumptions, in
that sense.

The following theorems about realizability all refer to the ex-
tended sense. In some cases, sharper theorems about narrow
realizability can be obtained; but in addition to greater com-
plication in statement this were of little practical value, since our
present neurophysiological knowledge determines the law of ex-
citation only to extended equivalence, and the more precise
theorems differ according to which possible assumption we make.
Our less precise theorems, however, are invariant under equiva-
lence, and are still sufficient for all purposes in which the exact
time for impulses to pass through the whole net is not crucial.

Our central problems may now be stated exactly: first, to find
an effective method of obtaining a set of computable S constituting
a solution of any. given net; and second, to characterize the class
of realizable S in an effective fashion. Materially stated, the
problems are to calculate the behavior of any net, and to find a
net which will behave in a specified way, when such a net exists.

A net will be called cyclic if it contains a circle: i.e., if there
exists a chain ¢;, ¢:41, -.- of neurons on it, each member of the
chain synapsing upon the next, with the same beginning and end.
If a set of its neurons ¢ , C2, -.- , ¢» is such that its removal from
\ leaves it without circles, and no smaller class of neurons has this
property, the set is called a cyclic set, and its cardinality is the
order of MM. In an important sense, as we shall see, the order of a
net is an index of the complexity of its behavior. In particular,
nets of zero order have especially simple properties; we shall
discuss them first.

Let us define a temporal propositional expression (a TPE), desig-
nating a temboral propositional function (TPF), by the following
recursion:

A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity

1. A 'p' [zi] is a TPE, where p; is a predicate-variable.

2. If S,; and S, are TPE containing the same free individual
variable, so are SS,, SivS2, S:.S: and S;. ~ S:.

3. Nothing else is a TPE.

Theorem I

Every net of order 0 can be solved in terms of temporal propositional
Expressions.

Let ¢; be any neuron of 9U with a threshold 6; > 0, and let ca,
Cia, «++ 5 Cx have respectively na, nis, ++. , Nip EXCitatory synapses
upon it. Let cy, ¢j2, -++, Cj have inhibitory synapses upon it.
Let «; be the set of the subclasses of {ra, nie, ..- , Nip} Such that
the sum of their members exceeds 6;. We shall then be able to
write, in accordance with the assumptions mentioned above,

Nii). =.8 IL~ Nim (1) ‘oe iy Nuter)t @)

where the ‘>.’ and ‘JJ’ are syntactical symbols for disjunctions
and conjunctions which are finite in each case. Since an expression
of this form can be written for each ¢; which is not a peripheral
afferent, we can, by substituting the corresponding expression in
(1) for each Nj, or N;, whose neuron is not a peripheral afferent,
and repeating the process on the result, ultimately come to an
expression for N; in terms solely of peripherally afferent N, since
M is without circles. Moreover, this expression will be a TPE,
since obviously (1) is; and it follows immediately from the definition
that the result of substituting a TPE for a constituent f(z) in a
TPE is also one.

Theorem H
Every TPE is realizable by a net of order zero.

The functor S obviously commutes with disjunction, conjunction,
and negation. It is obvious that the result of substituting any S,,
realizable in the narrow sense (i.n.s.), for the p(z) in a realizable
expression S, is itself realizable i.n.s.; one constructs the realizing
net by replacing the peripheral afferents in the net for S: by the
realizing neurons in the nets for the S;, The one neuron net

A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity

realizes (21) in.s., and Figure 1-a shows a net that realizes
Spi(zi) and hence SS2, in.s., if S2 can be realized i.n.s. Now if
S_ and S; are realizable then §*S; and S*S3 are realizable i.n.s.,
for suitable m and n. Hence so are S™**S, and S™**S;. Now the
nets of Figures 1b, c and d respectively realize S(pi(21) v po(%:)),
SCpi(a) . polzr)), and S(pi(zi) . ~ pe(z1)) ins. Hence St! (Siv
S.), Smtett (S;. S82), and S#tett (S, .~ S,) are realizable i.n.s.
Therefore Siv S28; . S28, . ~ S2 are realizable if S, and S, are.
By complete’induction, all TPE are realizable. In this way all
nets may be regarded as built out of the fundamental elements
of Figures 1a, b, c, d, precisely as the temporal propositional ex-
pressions are generated out of the operations of precession, dis-
junction, conjunction, and conjoined negation. In particular,
corresponding to any description of state, or distribution of the
values true and false for the actions of all the neurons of a net save
that which makes them all false, a single neuron is constructible
whose firing is a necessary and sufficient condition for the validity
of that description. Moreover, there is always an indefinite number
of topologically different nets realizing any TPE.

Theorem III
Let there be given a complex sentence S, built up in any manner out
of elementary sentences of the form p(z, — zz) where zz is any numeral,
by any of the propositional connections: negation, disjunction, conjunction,
implication, and equivalence. Then 8, is a TPE and only if it ts false
when. its constituent p(z: — zz) are all assumed false—i.e., replaced
by false sentences—or that the last line in its truth-table contains an

‘F’ —or there is no term in its Hilbert disjunctive normal form com-

posed exclusively of negated terms.

These latter three conditions are of course equivalent (Hilbert
and Ackermann, 1938). We see by induction that the first of them
is necessary, since p(z, — 2z) becomes false when it is replaced
by a false sentence, and S,v Sz, S,. Sz and S;.~ S: are all
false if both their constituents are. We see that the last condition
is sufficient by remarking that a disjunction is a TPH when its
constituents are, and that any term

, Si. S,....Snw~ mele Meee ew

can be written as

A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity

(Si. Soeses Sn) _™~ (Sm4it Smpev vee .v S,),
which is clearly a TPE.

The method of the last theorems does in fact provide a very
convenient and workable procedure for constructing nervous nets
to order, for those cases where there is no reference to events
indefinitely far in the past in the specification of the conditions.
By way of example, we may consider the case of heat produced
by a transient cooling.

If a cold object is held to the skin for a moment and removed,
a sensation of heat will be felt; if it is applied for a longer time, the
sensation will be only of cold, with no preliminary warmth, how-
ever transient. It is known that one cutaneous receptor is affected
by heat, and another by cold. If we let N; and N2 be the actions
of the respective receptors and Ns and N, of neurons whose
activity implies a sensation of heat and cold, our requirements
may be written as

Ns) : = =: NiGi—1) .v. N23) . ~ NoG—-2)

N.(t). = .N2(t—2) .N2G¢—1)
where we suppose for simplicity that the required persistence in
the sensation of cold is, say, two synaptic delays, compared with
one for that of heat. These conditions clearly fall under ‘Theorem
III. A net may consequently be constructed to realize them, by
the method of Theorem II. We begin by writing them in a fashion
which exhibits them as built out of their constituents by the
operations realized in Figures la, b, c, d: i.¢., in the form

Ns(t) . = . S{Ni@) v S[(SN2f)) . ~ Na()}}

Nit). = . S{[SN2@)]} . Ne(é)}.
First we construct a net for the function enclosed in the greatest
number of brackets and proceed outward; in this case we run a

net of the form shown in Figure 1a from cz to some neuron ¢a, say,
so that

N.() _=. SN2(t).
Next introduce two nets of the forms 1c and 1d, both running
from c, and ¢2, and ending respectively at c4 and say ¢s. Then
N,(t). =. SIN.(é) . No]. = . S[(SN2()) . N22).
Nit). =. SING). ~ Nef). = . S[CSN2(é)) . ~ NoG@)I.

A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Acti vity
Finally, run a net of the form 1b from ¢: and ¢, to cs, and derive

» =. S{Ni(t) v S[(SNo(t)) « ~ No(t)]}.

These expressions for N;(t) and N,(t) are the ones desired; and
the realizing net in toto is shown in Figure ie.

This illusion makes very clear the dependence of the correspond-
ence between perception and the “external world’ upon the
specific structural properties of the intervening nervous net. The
same illusion, of course, could also have been produced under
various other assumptions about the behavior of the cutaneous
receptors, with correspondingly different nets.

We shall now consider some theorems of equivalence: i.e.,
theorems which demonstrate the essential identity, save for time,
of various alternative laws of nervous excitation. Let us first dis-
cuss the case of relative inhibition. By this we mean the supposition
that the firing of an inhibitory synapse does not absolutely prevent
the firing of the neuron, but merely raises its threshold, so that
a greater number of excitatory synapses must fire concurrently
to fire it than would otherwise be needed. We may suppose, losing
no generality, that the increase in threshold is unity for the firing
of each such synapse; we then have the theorem:

Theorem IV

Relative and absolute inhibition are equivalent in the extended sense.

We may write out a law of nervous excitation after the fashion
of (1), but employing the assumption of relative inhibition instead;

inspection then shows that this expression is a TPE. An example ©

of the replacement of relative inhibition by absolute is given by
Figure if. The reverse replacement is even easier; we give the
inhibitory axons afferent to ¢; any sufficiently large number of
inhibitory synapses apiece.

Second, we consider the case of extinction. We may write this
in the form of a variation in the threshold 6, after the neuron ¢;
has fired; to the nearest integer—and only to this approximation
is the variation in threshold significant in natural forms of excita-
tion—this may be written as a sequence 06; + 0; for 7 synaptic

- 10 -

A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity

delays after firing, where 6; = 0 for 7 large enough, say 7 = M or
greater. We may then state

Theorem V
Extinction is equivalent to absolute inhibition.

For, assuming relative inhibition to hold for the moment, we
need merely run M circuits Ki, Sz, ... Su containing respectively
1, 2, ..., M neurons, such that the firing of each link in any is
sufficient to fire the next, from the neuron ¢,; back to it, where
the end of the circuit J; has just 6; inhibitory synapses upon ¢;.
It is evident that this will produce the desired results. The reverse
substitution may be accomplished by the diagram of Figure Ig.
From the transitivity of replacement, we infer the theorem. To
this group of theorems also belongs the well-known

Theorem VI

Facilitation and temporal summation may be replaced by spatial sum-
mation.

This is obvious: one need merely introduce a suitable sequence
of delaying chains, of increasing numbers of synapses, between the
exciting cell and the neuron whereon temporal summation is
desired to hold. The assumption of spatial summation will then
give the required results. See e.g. Figure 1h. This procedure had
application in showing that the observed temporal summation in
gross nets does not imply such a mechanism in the interaction of
individual neurons.

The phenomena of learning, which are of a character persisting
over most physiological changes in nervous activity, seem to re-
quire the possibility of permanent alterations in the structure of
nets. The simplest such alteration is the formation of new synapses
or equivalent local depressions of threshold. We suppose that some
axonal terminations cannot at first excite the succeeding neuron;
but if at any time the neuron fires, and the axonal terminations
are simultaneously excited, they become synapses of the ordinary
kind, henceforth capable of exciting the neuron. The loss of an
inhibitory synapse gives an entirely equivalent result. We shall
then have

- 11 -

A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity

Theorem VII
Alterable synapses can be replaced by circles.

This is accomplished by the method of Figure 1i. It is also to
be remarked that a neuron which becomes and remains spon-
taneously active can likewise be replaced by a circle, which is set
into activity by a peripheral afferent when the activity commences,
and inhibited by one when it ceases.

THE THEORY: NETS WITH CIRCLES

The treatment of nets which do not satisfy our previous assump-
tion of freedom from circles is very much more difficult than that
case. This is largely a consequence of the possibility that activity
may be set up in a circuit and continue reverberating around it
for an indefinite period of time, so that the realizable Pr may
involve reference to past events of an indefinite degree of remote-
ness. Consider such a net $1, say of order f, and let ¢1, ¢2, ..., cp be
a cyclic set of neurons of 2. It is first of all clear from the definition
that every N, of 9{ can be expressed as a TPE, of Ni, No, ..., Np
and the absolute afferents; the solution of 9{ involves then only
the determination of expressions for the cyclic set. This done, we
shall derive a set of expressions [A]:

N; (21) -=., Pr{S™ Ni(zi), Sr N2(21), eeey Sip N,(z1)], (2)

where Pr; also involves peripheral afferents. Now if n is the least
common multiple of the n,;, we shall, by substituting their equiva-
lents according to (2) in (3) for the Nj, and repeating this
process often enough on the result, obtain S of the form

Ni(ai) . = . Pri[S”* Ni (21), S” No(z1), »»- , S” Np(21)]- (3)

These expressions may be written in the Hilbert disjunctive nor-
mal form as
Ni(z1) -. = . > Sa] S*Nj(z:) [] ~ S* N;(z:), for suitable *, (4)
aek jek jep

B atk .

where S, is a TPE of the absolute afferents of 9(. There exist
some 2” different sentences formed out of the pN; by conjoining
to the conjunction of some set of them the conjunction of the

- 12 -

A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity

negations of the rest. Denumerating these by %:(z), X2(z1), ---,
Xep(Z1), We may, by use of the expressions (4), arrive at an equi-
pollent set of equations of the form

2p

Xi(a).=. Du, Pris(21) » S"X; (21). (5)

Now we import the subscripted numerals 7,7 into the object-
language: i.e., define Pr, and Pr2 such that Pri(zz,2:) . = . X,(2z;)
and Pyr.(z21,222,21) . = . Pr,,(z1) are provable whenever 2z, and
2%, denote 7 and 7 respectively.

Then we may rewrite (5) as

(21) ZZp : Pry (21, Z3)

» = . (H22)22p . Pro(21, 22, 23 ~ ZZn) » Pry (Z2, Z3 — 2Zn) (6)
where 2z,, denotes n and zz, denotes 2?. By repeated substitution
we arrive at an expression

(21)Z2p 3 Pry (Zi, 22, 222) . = . (H2)22p (Hz3)z2,.. . (Ez,)zZp.
Pro (21, 22, 22n (222 — 1)) . Pro(Zo, Zs, ZZ, (222 ~1))..... (7)
Pro(Zn—1,2n;0) . Pri(Z.,0), for any numeral zz, which denotes s.
This is easily shown by induction to be equipollent to
(21)22p 3. Pri(Zi, 22, 222) : = 2 (Ef) (22) 222 — 1f (22 ZZ)
S 22y a f (22n 222) = 21. Pre(f(zzn (22 + 1)), (8)
Ff (22n 22)) » Pri(f (0), 0)
and since this is the case for all 2z2, it is also true that
(Za) (21)2zp 2 Pri (Zi, 24) . = - (EF) (22) (2a — 1) « fl)
S B2y 0 f(s) = Af (Zs) = 21. Prof[f(@2 + 1), f@), 2] . (9)
Pr, [f(res (Zs, 2Zn)), res (Za, 22n))],

where zz, denotes n, res (7,5) is the residue of r mod s and zz,
denotes 2”, This may be written in a less exact way as

Nt). =. 4d) wi -—1. (4) S 2?. of) =7.
Plo(e + 1), dz) « Nolo) (0)],

where x and t are also assumed divisible by n, and Pr, denotes P.
From the preceding remarks we shall have

- 13-

A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity

Theorem VIII

The expression (9) for neurons of the cyclic set of a net D together
with certain TPE expressing the actions of other neurons in terms of
them, constitute a solution of OL.

Consider now the question of the realizability of a set of S;. A
first necessary condition, demonstrable by an easy induction, is that

should be true, with similar statements for the other free p in S;:
1.€., NO nervous net can take account of future peripheral afferents.
Any S; satisfying this requirement can be replaced by an equi-
pollent S of the form
(Ef) (Z2)Z1 (23)Z2Zp 3 fe Prim:
f(z, ZZ; =~1.=. pes (22) (11)
where zz, denotes p, by defining
Prms = f{(2i) (2)21 (Z3)ZZp 2. f(21, 22,23) = O. v . f (21, Z2, Zs)
=1 :f (21, Ze, Z3) =l1.=. Dus (Ze) Pian as S,].
Consider now these series of classes a,, for which
Ni(t) : = : Ee) (w)tQn)q : dear? Nn(e) . = . ot, 2, m) = 1.
j=qt+1,-":,M]) (12)
holds for some net. ‘These will be called prehensible classes. Let us —
define the Boolean ring generated by a class of classes « as the

aggregate of the classes which can be formed from members of «x
by repeated application of the logical operations; i.e., we put

R(x) = pA[(@, 8) : cex

— aed ia, BEX. . ~ a, a. 8, av Bed].
We shall also define
R («) -=.R({x) — ip — “x,
R(x) =p Aa, B)taeKx—-adt.—7.—a,a.8,avB,8 “eed
Relk) = R(x) — e' pt — “e,
and

o(y, t) = d[(m) . 6+ 1,t,m) = y(m)].

- 14 -

A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity

The class &.(x) is formed from « in analogy with @(«), but by
repeated application not only of the logical operations but also
of that which replaces a class of properties Pe a by S(P) ¢ S “a.
We shall then have the

LEMMA
Pr,(pi, po, «++, Pm, 21) is a TPE if and only if

(21) (Pi, --- » Dm) (EH Pmi1) ? Pmsi € Re({ fr, Po, -ee Pn} )
Pm+i(Zi) = Pri (pi, pa, ++ , Pm 21) (13)

is true; and it is a 7PEnot involving ‘S” if and only if this holds
when ‘&,’ is replaced by ‘&’, and we then obtain

Theorem IX

A series of classes oy, a2, ... &, 18 a Series of prehenstble classes if and
only if

(Em) (En) (p)n@) (y) 2. @)my(z) = Ov ¢@ =1:—: 6)

(Ey)m. o(y) = 0. BR[Y((Et) . y = a:)). vv. (x)m.

pie) = 0. BRIY((B:) . y = a]: @) G) tgeas. (14)

o(¢,ntt+p).—. (Ef). f8. (w)ym@)t—-1.
ond +1) +p, na + p,w) = f(nt + p, nx + p, wv).

The proof here follows directly from the lemma. The condition
is necessary, since every net for which an expression of the form
(4) can be written obviously verifies it, the &’s being the charac-
teristic functions of the S, and the § for each y being the class
whose designation has the form [| Pri] Pr;, where Pr, denotes

je

tea
a, for all k. Conversely, we may write an expression of the form
(4) for a net % fulfilling prehensible classes satisfying (14) by putting
for the Pr, Pr denoting the 4’s and a Pr, written in the analogue
for classes of the disjunctive normal form, and denoting the a
corresponding to that 4, conjoined to it. Since every S of the form
(4) is clearly realizable, we have the theorem.

It is of some interest to consider the extent to which we can
by knowledge of the present determine the whole past of various
special nets: i.e., when we may construct a net the firing of the
cyclic set of whose neurons requires the peripheral afferents to

- 15 -

A Logical Calculus of Ideas immanent in Nervous Activity

have had a set of past values specified by given functions ¢;. In
this case the classes a; of the last theorem reduced to unit classes;
and the condition may be transformed into

(Em, n) (p)nG, 9) (Bj) :. @)m: p@) =0.v. ¥@) =1:
gies (hy, nt + p):—: (w)m(z)t —1. oi(n(t+ 1)
+p, nz + p,w) = o,(nt + p, nz + p,w):.

(u,v) (wm. o(a(u + 1) + p, mu + p, w)

On account of limitations of space, we have presented the above
argument very sketchily; we propose to expand it and certain of
its implications in a further publication,

The condition of the last theorem is fairly simple in principle,
though not in detail; its application to practical cases would,
however, require the exploration of some 2” classes of functions,
namely the members of R({a, ..., a}). Since each of these is
a possible 8 of Theorem IX, this result cannot be sharpened. But
we may obtain a sufficient condition for the realizability of an S
which is very easily applicable and probably covers most practical
purposes. This is given by

Theorem X
Let us define a set of K of S by the following recursion:

1. Any TPE and any TPE whose arguments have been re-
placed by members of K belong to K;

2. If Pri(z;) is a member of K, then (z2)2; . Pr:(z2), (Ez2)21
Pr,(z2), and Cnq(2i) . $ belong to it, where C,,, denotes the property
of being congruent to m modulo n,m < n.

3. The set K has no further members.
Then every member of KX is realizable.
For, if Pr,(z:) is realizable, nervous nets for which
. Pr (23) . SN; (21)
. Pr: (21) v SN; (21)

N;(z;) .
N, (21) «

are the expressions of equation (4), realize (z2)z, . Pri(z2) and

- 16 -

A Logical Caiculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous A ctivity

(E z2)z, . Pri(z2) respectively; and a simple circuit, ¢, C2, «-+ , a,
of n links, each sufficient to excite the next, gives an expression

Nai) « = ~ NiO) . Crs

for the last form. By induction we derive the theorem.

One more thing is to be remarked in conclusion. It is easily
shown: first, that every net, if furnished with a tape, scanners
connected to afferents, and suitable efferents to perform the
necessary motor-operations, can compute only such numbers as
can a Turing machine; second, that each of the latter numbers
can be computed by such a net; and that nets with circles can be
computed by such a net; and that nets with circles can compute,
without scanners and a tape, some of the numbers the machine
can, but no others, and not all of them. This is of interest as
affording a psychological justification of the Turing definition of
computability and its equivalents, Church’s 4 — definability and
Kleene’s primitive recursiveness: If any number can be computed
by an organism, it is computable by these definitions, and con-
versely.

CONSEQUENCES

Causality, which requires description of states and a law of
necessary connection relating them, has appeared in several forms
in several sciences, but never, except in statistics, has it been as
irreciprocal as in this theory. Specification for any one time of
afferent stimulation and of the activity of all constituent neurons,
each an “all-or-none” affair, determines the state. Specification
of the nervous net provides the law of necessary connection whereby
one can compute from the description of any state that of the
succeeding state, but the inclusion of disjunctive relations prevents
complete determination of the one before. Moreover, the regen-
erative activity of constituent circles renders reference indefinite
as to time past. Thus our knowledge of the world, including
ourselves, is incomplete as to space and indefinite as to time.
This ignorance, implicit in all our brains, is the counterpart of
the abstraction which renders our knowledge useful. The role of
brains in determining the epistemic relations of our theories to our

- 17-

A Logical Calculus of [deas Immanent in Nervous Activity

Fioure 1

- 18 -

A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity

observations and of these to the facts is all too clear, for it is ap-
parent that every idea and every sensation is realized by activity
within that net, and by no such activity are the actual afferents
fully determined.

There is no theory we may hold and no observation we can make
that will retain so much as its old defective reference to the facts
if the net be altered. Tinnitus, paraesthesias, hallucinations, de-
lusions, confusions and disorientations intervene. Thus empiry
confirms that if our nets are undefined, our facts are undefined,
and to the “real” we can attribute not so much as one quality
or “form.” With determination of the net, the unknowable object
of knowledge, the “‘thing in itself,” ceases to be unknowable.

To psychology, however defined, specification of the net would
contribute all that could be achieved in that field—even if the
analysis were pushed to ultimate psychic units or “psychons,”’ for
a psychon can be no less than the activity of a single neuron.
Since that activity is inherently propositional, all psychic events
have an intentional, or ‘‘semiotic,’’ character. The “‘all-or-none”
law of these activities, and the conformity of their relations to
those of the logic of propositions, insure that the relations of

= EXPRESSION FOR THE FIGURES
In the figure the neuron ¢; is always marked with the numeral i upon the
body of the cell, and the corresponding action is dencted by ‘N’ with z as sub-
script, as in the text.
Figure la N2(t).
Figure 1b N;3(t).
Figure Ic N3(t).
Figure 1d N;(¢).
Figure te N;(t) :
N.{t).
Figure 1f N,(é) :

ll

» Nilé — 1)

- Nit — 1) v Nilt — 1)

~ Nilé — 1). Ni(t — 1)

- Nit —1). WS N2lt — 1)

>Ni(t — 1). 0. Not — 3). ~ Nilt — 2)

» N2(t — 2). Ne(t — 1)

:~ Nit — 1). Nol — 1) v N3(¢ — 1). 0. Ni(t — 1) -
N.(t — 1). N,a(t — 1)

> ~ Nilt — 2). Na(t — 2) V Nat — 2). v. Ni(fé — 2).
N2(t — 2). Ns(t — 2)

Figure ig N3(é). =. N2({t ~ 2). ™~ Milé — 3)

Figure th N.(t). =. Ni(t — 1). Milt — 2)

Figure 1i N3(t): =: Not —1).V. Milt — 1). (Ext — 1. Nix) . N2(x)

|

Il Il i

I

Nutt):

- 19 -

A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity

psychons are those of the two-valued logic of propositions. Thus
in psychology, introspective, behavioristic or physiological, the
fundamental relations are those of two-valued logic.

Hence arise constructional solutions of holistic problems involving
the differentiated continuum of sense awareness and the norma-
tive, perfective and resolvent properties of perception and execu-
tion. From the irreciprocity of causality it follows that even if the
net be known, though we may predict future from present activities,
we can deduce neither afferent from central, nor central from
efferent, nor past from present activities—conclusions which are
reinforced by the contradictory testimony of eye-witnesses, by the
difficulty of diagnosing differentially the organically diseased, the
hysteric and the malingerer, and by comparing one’s own memn-
ories or recollections with his contemporaneous records. Moreover,
systems which so respond to the difference between afferents to
a regenerative net and certain activity within that net, as to
reduce the difference, exhibit purposive behavior; and organisms
are known to possess many such systems, subserving homeostasis,
appetition and attention. Thus both the formal and the final
aspects of that activity which we are wont to call menial are
rigorously deducible from present neurophysiology. The psychi-
atrist may take comfort from the obvious conclusion concerning
causality—that, for prognosis, history is never necessary. He can
take little from the equally valid conclusion that his observables
are explicable only in terms of nervous activities which, until
recently, have been beyond his ken. The crux of this ignorance
is that inference from any sample of overt behavior to nervous
nets is not unique, whereas, of imaginable nets, only one in fact
exists, and may, at any moment, exhibit some unpredictable
activity. Certainly for the psychiatrist it is more to the point that
in such systems ‘‘Mind” no longer “‘goes more ghostly than a
ghost.” Instead, diseased mentality can be understood without loss
of scope or rigor, in the scientific terms of neurophysiology. For
neurology, the theory sharpens the distinction between nets neces-
sary or merely sufficient for given activities, and so clarifies the
relations of disturbed structure to disturbed function. In its own
domain the difference between equivalent nets and nets equivalent
in the narrow sense indicates the appropriate use and importance

- 20 -

A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity

of temporal studies of nervous activity: and to mathematical bio-
physics the theory contributes a tool for rigorous symbolic treat-
ment of known nets and an easy method of constructing hypo-
thetical nets of required properties.

REFERENCES

1. Carnap, R.: The Logical Syntax of Language. New York, Harcourt,
Brace and Company, 1938.

2. Hilbert, D., und Ackermann, W.: Grundiige der Theoretischen Logik.
Berlin, J. Springer, 1927.

3. Whitehead, A.N., and Russell, B.: Principia Mathematica. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 1925.

originally published in: Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, Vol. 5, 1943, p. 115-133

- 21 -
