ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 393

RESEARCH NOTE

The Computational Complexity of
Probabilistic Inference Using Bayesian
Belief Networks

Gregory F. Cooper
Medical Computer Science Group,

Knowledge Systems Laboratory, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305-5479, USA

ABSTRACT

Bayesian belief networks provide a natural, efficient method for representing probabilistic dependen-
cies among a set of variables. For these reasons, numerous researchers are exploring the use of belief
networks as a knowledge representation in artificial intelligence. Algorithms have been developed
previously for efficient probabilistic inference using special classes of belief networks. More general
classes of belief networks, however, have eluded efforts to develop efficient inference algorithms. We
show that probabilistic inference using belief networks is NP-hard. Therefore, it seems unlikely that
an exact algorithm can be developed to perform probabilistic inference efficiently over all classes of
belief networks. This result suggests that research should be directed away from the search for a
general, efficient probabilistic inference algorithm, and toward the design of efficient special-case,
average-case, and approximation algorithms.

1. Introduction

The graphical representation of probabilistic relationships among events has
been the subject of considerable research. In the field of artificial intelligence,
several classical systems, such as PROSPECTOR [9] and CASNET [30], have used
a directed graph to represent probabilistic relationships among events. Recent-
ly, a particular type of probabilistic graphical representation, called the
Bayesian belief network, has been defined and explored by numerous re-
searchers. In addition to being called a Bayesian belief network [20], it has
been termed a causal net [11,12], causal network [17], probabilistic causal
network [6], probabilistic cause-effect model [28], and probabilistic influence

Artificial Intelligence 42 (1990) 393-405
0004-3702 /90/$3.50 © 1990, Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. (North-Holland)

394 G.F. COOPER

diagram [29]. In this paper, we refer to a Bayesian belief network simply as a
belief network.

A key advantage of belief networks is that they represent probabilistic
relationships concisely. It is necessary to consider only the known dependen-
cies among variables in a domain, rather than to assume that all variables are
dependent on all other variables [6, 22]. This provides an efficient and expres-
sive language for acquiring and representing knowledge in many domains.
These advantages have been key motivations behind the development of
several expert systems that use belief networks for diagnosis and for data
interpretation [1-3, 6, 15, 16].

Probabilistic inference using some topological classes of belief networks has
been resistant to any efficient algorithmic solution [20]. In particular, mudtiply
connected belief networks form the most general class of such problems. A
multiply connected belief network contains at least one pair of nodes (vari-
ables) that have more than one undirected path connecting them. A singly
connected belief network contains no pair of nodes that have more than one
undirected path between them. It appears that large multiply connected
networks are needed for some complex domains, such as medicine. In this
paper, we show that probabilistic inference using multiply connected networks
is NP-hard. Therefore, it is unlikely that a general, efficient probabilistic
inference algorithm can be developed for belief networks. Knowing that the
problem is NP-hard is useful because it directs research away from the quest
for a general, efficient algorithm, and toward the design of good special-case,
average-case, and approximation algorithms.

In the remainder of this paper, we first briefly review the belief-network
representation and the kinds of probabilistic inference that typically are
performed using belief networks. Then, we show that probabilistic inference
using belief networks is NP-hard, and we extend this result in several ways.
Finally, we conclude with a discussion of the significance of this result for
future research on the design of probabilistic inference algorithms for belief
networks.

2. Belief Networks

A belief network consists of a graphical structure that is augmented by a set of
probabilities. The graphical structure is a directed, acyclic graph in which
nodes represent domain variables. Without loss of generality, we will assume
that the nodes represent propositional variables with values of either true (T)
or false (F). Prior probabilities are assigned to source nodes, and conditional
probabilities are associated with arcs. In particular, for each source node x,
(i.e., a node without any incoming arcs), there is a prior probability function
P(x,); for each node x, with one or more direct predecessors 7;, there is a
conditional probability function P(x,|,). We assume that probability func-

COMPLEXITY OF INFERENCE 395

tions are represented in the form of explicit function tables, although this
assumption is by no means necessary for the proof in Section 4. We shall
represent a general belief network as (V, A, P), where V is the set of variables
(i.e., vertices or nodes). A the set of arcs between variables, and P the set of
probabilities. Figure 1 contains a belief-network structure corresponding to a
problem that is discussed in detail in Section 4.

Belief networks are capable of representing the probabilities over any
discrete sample space, such that the probability of any sample point in that
space can be computed from the probabilities in the belief network. The key
feature of belief networks is their explicit representation of the conditional
independence among events. A belief network represents a full joint-probabili-
ty space over the n event variables in the network. In particular, investigators
have shown [21, 29] that the joint probability of some particular instantiation’
of all n variables in a belief network can be calculated as follows:

Therefore, the joint probability of any instantiation of all the variables in a
belief network can be computed as the product of only n probabilities. We can
recover the complete joint-probability space from the belief-network repre-
sentation by calculating the joint probabilities that result from every possible
instantiation of the n variables in the network. Instead of our having to
represent explicitly all 2” probabilities in the joint-probability space, the
conditional independencies expressed among the variables in a belief network
require only that we represent P(x, | 7,) for each node x,; this representation
may require a total of many fewer than 2” probabilities. In addition, algorithms
have been developed that often do not require the explicit reconstruction of
the underlying joint-probability space to perform probabilistic inference
[17, 20, 29].

truth-setting

component

clause-satisfaction-testing
component

overall-satisfaction-testing
component

Fig. 1. A belief-network structure. The probabilities in this belief network are defined in Section 4;
the annotations on the right of the figure also are explained there.

'The term instantiated variable is used to denote a variable that has a known, assigned value.
For example, an instantiated propositional variable would have an assigned value of either true (T)
or false (F).

396 G.F. COOPER

Although an arc from a node x to a node y frequently is used to express that
x causes y, this interpretation of arcs in belief networks is not the only one
possible. For example, y may be only correlated with x, but not caused by x.
Thus, although belief networks are able to represent causal relationships, they
are not restricted to such causal interpretations. In this regard, belief networks
can be viewed as a representation for probabilistic rule-based systems.

In summary, belief networks allow an explicit graphical representation of the
probabilistic conditional dependencies and independencies among variables
that may represent events, states, objects, propositions, or other entities.
Generally, a belief network greatly reduces the number of probabilities that
must be assessed and stored (relative to the full joint-probability space).

3. Probabilistic Inference

The phrase probabilistic inference using belief networks typically has been used
to mean the calculation of P(S,|S,), where S, is either a single instantiated
variable or a conjunction of instantiated variables, and S, is a conjunction of
instantiated variables. A simple form of probabilistic inference results when
both S, and S, are single instantiated variables. For example, in the context of
the belief network in Fig. 1, we might request the calculation of P(u, =T| Y=
T). More commonly, S, can be a conjunction of instantiated variables—as for
example, P(u,=T|¥=TaAu,=F). A more general form of probabilistic
inference exists when S, and $, can be propositions in propositional logic
[8,19]. An example of inference using a probabilistic proposition is the
calculation of P(C, =T v C,=F| Y=T). The most restricted form of prob-
abilistic inference results when there is no explicit conditioning information and
the task is to determine P(Y = T) for some propositional variable Y; the other
forms of probabilistic inference described in this section are generalizations of
the computation of P(Y=T). It is this restricted form of inference that we
shall call probabilistic inference in the remainder of this paper. By proving that
computing P(Y =T) is NP-hard we will prove that the other more general
forms of probabilistic inference are NP-hard as well.

4. Proving that the Problem Is NP-Hard

To prove that a problem Q’ is NP-hard, it is sufficient to transform a known
NP-complete problem Q to Q’ and to show that this transformation can be
done efficiently (i.e., in time that is polynomial in the size of Q). In this paper,
we shall transform a well-known NP-complete problem, called 3-Satisfiability
(3SAT) [5,10], to a Decision-problem version of Probabilistic Inference using
Belief NETworks (PIBNETD). The transformation from the PIBNETD decision
problem to the probabilistic inference problem, called simply PIBNET, will then
be straightforward. Thus, we will show that PIBNET is NP-hard.

There are numerous other ways that we could prove that PIBNET is NP-hard.

COMPLEXITY OF INFERENCE 397

In particular, different known NP-complete problems can be reduced to
PIBNET. As an example, consider the s—t network reliability problem. Here a
network consists of a graph in which edges are assigned a probability of failure.
The problem is to determine the probability that there is a path of unfailed
edges in the graph between two nodes s and ¢. Rosenthal has shown this
problem to be NP-hard for undirected networks [27]. More pertinent to
PIBNET, Provan and Ball have shown the s—f network reliability problem to be
NP-hard for directed, acyclic graphs [25]. It is possible to reduce the s—t
network reliability problem for directed, acyclic graphs to the PIBNET problem.
In this paper, however, we shall use a reduction from 3SAT, because this
strategy yields a very simple proof and demonstrates that PIBNET is NP-hard
even for belief networks that are significantly restricted topologically. Rosen-
thal has applied a related reduction using the general satisfiability problem to
show that solving fault trees is NP-hard [26]. Finally, by using 38sAT to prove
that PIBNET is NP-hard, we can readily derive additional complexity results on
belief-network inference, as discussed in Section 5.

4.1. The definition of 3SAT

The 3SAT problem involves a collection C = {c,,c,,...,C¢,,} of clauses on a
finite set U of n Boolean variables. If u is a variable in U, then u and - u are
literals over U. The literal u is true if and only if the variable u is true (T). The
literal au is true if and only if the variable u if false (F). Each clause c,
contains a disjunction of three literals over U, for example, (4 u, v u, V Tus).
The clause in this example will be satisfied (i.e., true) unless u, = T, u, =F,
and u,=T. A collection C of clauses over U is satisfiable if and only if there
exists some truth assignment for U that simultaneously satisfies all the clauses
in C. The 3SAT decision problem involves determining whether there is a truth
assignment for U that satisfies all the clauses in C.

For example, consider an instance of 3SAT in which U = {u,, u,, u,, u,} and

C= ((u, Vu, Vv u;), (24, V4, VU), (U,V Tu; Vv u,)}.

One satisfying truth assignment is given by u, =T, u, =F, u, =F, and u, =T.
Thus, the decision problem has the answer “yes” for this example. This
example will be called 3SAT,,.

4.2. Transforming 3SAT to PIBNETD

We now transform 3SAT to PIBNETD. PIBNETD is a decision problem that
determines, for some variable Y in a given belief network, whether P(Y =
T) > 0. PIBNETD returns “‘yes” if P(Y =T)> 0; it returns “no” otherwise.
Let U={u,,u,,...,u,} and C= {c,,c,,...,c¢,,} be any instance of 3SAT.
We must construct a belief network BN containing variable Y such that

398 G.F. COOPER

P(Y =T)>0 if and only if C is satisfiable. BN will consist of several compo-
nents, including those that set the truth values of U and those that test whether
C is satisfied given a particular truth-value setting of U. In this construction,
the terms vertex, node, and variable will be used interchangeably. All variables
will be propositional.

There is a truth-setting component (V', P') that probabilistically instantiates
the values of each of the variables in U. In particular,

Vi=U,
and
P'={P(u,=T)= 3, P(u,=T)=3,..., Plu, =T) = 3}.

The truth-setting component for example 3SAT,, is shown in Fig. 1, with nodes
represented by circles.

For each clause c,€ C, 1<j<™m, there is a clause-satisfaction-testing sub-
component (V;, A;, P;) that tests whether a given instantiation of the vari-
ables in U satisfies clause c; in C. The components of (V;, A;, P;) are defined
as follows:

Ss 1 2 3
Vi={wi,wi,wi,G},

where w, is the variable corresponding to the first literal in clause c,. Similarly,

wy and Ww; are the variables corresponding to the second and third literals in c,,

respectively; for instance, in example ISAT, clause c, =(“u, Vu, Vv us),
and therefore w,=u,, w,=u,, and w, =u,. The variable C; represents the
truth value of clause c,.

Ay = {09}, CG). (07. GW; GY}
Pi={P(C,=T|7,)},

2 3
where a, represents the conjunction of the three variables w, ,wi,w, of
clause c, ‘and

1, ifg(a.)=T,
m= TI.) = {0 if g(a.) = F,

where g,(7, ) is the truth function for clause c,.
For example, for clause c, in the 3SAT,, example, there is a corresponding
subcomponent (V3, A;, P;), where

V3 = {u,, Uy, Uy, C3},

COMPLEXITY OF INFERENCE 399

Ay = {(4z, Cs), (us, C3), (Ug, C3)} ,

P;={P(C,=T|u, =F, u,=T,u,=F)=0,
P(C,=Tl|u,=T,u,=T,u,=T)=1,
P(C,=T|u, =T, u,=T,u,=F)=1,
P(C, =T|u,=T, u,=F,u,=T)=1,
P(C,=T|u,=T, u,=F,u,=F)=1,
P(C,=T|u,=F,u,=T,u,=T)=1,
P(C,=T|u,=F,u, =F,u,=T)=1,
P(C,=T|u, =F, u,=F,u,=F)=1}.

The clause-satisfaction-testing component (V*, A’, P*) is composed of the

union of the clause-satisfaction-testing subcomponents corresponding to each
clause c,. In particular,

Vv=UV,, A=UA;, P=) P,;.
j= j=l j=l
The belief-network substructure for the clause-satisfaction-testing component
for example 3SAT,, is shown in Fig. 1.
Finally, there is an overall-satisfaction-testing component (V°, A°, P°), which
tests whether all the m clauses in C are satisfied. In particular, there is an arc
from each variable C, to a variable Y. Furthermore, a probability P(Y =

T|C,, C,,...,C,,) is defined as a component of the belief network, such that
P(Y=T|C,,C,...,C,)=1 if and only if C,=T, C,=T,...,C, =T;
otherwise, P(Y =T|C,, C,,..., C,,) =9.

Figure 1 demonstrates that we can achieve the same result of conjunctively
linking each variable C, to Y by using a set of intermediate dummy variables
designed as D,. Each dummy variable has the value T with probability 1, if
each of its parents has the value T; otherwise, it has the value T with
probability 0. The variable Y is related to its parents in the same conjunctive
manner as are the dummy nodes. In essence, numerous small component
AND-gates can be used to construct a large AND-gate linking each C, to Y. For
the case of using dummy variables to link each C, to Y, the construction of
(V°, A®°, P°) is informally defined as follows. Set V° contains the dummy
nodes, the node Y, and the nodes C,, C,,...,C,,. Set A® contains the arcs
between nodes in V°, as exemplified in Fig. 1. Finally, P° contains the
conjunctive probability functions just described.

The construction using dummy variables is important for two reasons. First,
it allows us to construct the belief network corresponding to a 3SAT problem

400 G.F. COOPER

using only small probability tables. This construction allows the NP-hardness
result to apply to the restricted case of belief networks constructed using only
tables, and not closed-form functions. Second, the dummy-variable construc-
tion renders the indegree of any node in the belief network to be less than 4.
Thus, the NP-hardness result will apply to belief networks with an indegree
restricted to be less than 4.

We complete the construction of the PIBNETD belief network BN by setting
BN = (V, A, P), where

V=V'UVSUV?,
A=AUA’,
P=P'UP*UP®.

The construction of a belief network corresponding to an instance of 3SAT
can be accomplished in time polynomial in the size of the 3SAT problem. In
particular, the construction of the truth-setting component is O(n), the con-
struction of the clause-satisfaction-testing component is O(m), and the con-
struction of the overail-satisfaction-testing component is O(m). All that re-
mains to be shown is that clause set C is satisfiable if and only if PY = T) > 0.

Define U, to be the ath instantiation of the variables in U, where for
1<i<n, if the ith digit (from the right) of the binary representation of a is 1,
then u, =T; and, if the ith digit of the binary representation of a is 0, then
u,; =F. For instance, in the 3SAT,, example, U, represents the instantiation
u,=F, u,=T, u, =F, and u, =T, because the binary representation of 5 is
0101. U, denotes a truth assignment to the variables in U that satisfies all the
clauses in C. C, denotes the set of instantiated variables that results from
assigning the value T to each variable C;, 1<j<m. C, denotes the Bth
instantiation of the C, variables, and is defined analogously to U,.

By the construction of BN and the definition of belief networks,

2n—1 21

P(Y=T)= % DY P(Y=T|C,)P(C,|U,)PU,)- (2)
B=0

a=0

Suppose C is satisfiable. In this case, one term of the sum in equation (2) is
P(Y =T|C,)P(C, | U,) P(U,), and thus

P(Y =T)2 P(Y=T|C)P(C,| U)PCU,) . (3)

From the construction of BN, P(Y = T| C,) = 1 and P(U,) = (4)”. It remains to
show that P(C, | U.) > 0. Based on the conditional independencies expressed in
the representation of BN, the probability P(C,|U,) can be expanded as
follows:

COMPLEXITY OF INFERENCE 401

P(C,|U,) = PCC, =T | wi, wes wi) PCC, = T | Wins Wn)»

m

(4)
where here we use wis Ww, and wy to represent the instantiation of the
variables wi, wis and wi, respectively, as designated by U,. Because U,
represents a satisfying truth assignment for C, it also must represent a
satisfying truth assignment for each clause c, in C. Therefore, by the construc-

tion of BN,
_ 12 3) _ .
P(C,=Tl|w,,w),wi)=1, 1<j<m.

Thus, P(C,| U,) =1, and therefore, P(Y =T)>0.

Conversely, suppose that C is not satisfiable. Then, for every truth assign-
ment U-— {T, F}, there is at least one clause c, that is not satisfied. Thus, by
the construction of BN, for every instantiation of U,, there is at least one
variable C, for which P(C,=T|w,,w;,w;) =0. Therefore, P(C,| U,) =0 for
all U,; this implies that the only possible positive terms in the sum of (2) must
exist when C, #C,. However, when C,#C,, the term P(Y=T|C,) =0.
Therefore, from (2), P(Y =T)=0. Thus, we have shown that any instance of
3SAT can be transformed to PIBNETD. This result implies that PIBNETD is
NP-hard.

In addition, PIBNETD is in the class NP because an instantiation of all the
variables in a belief-network (including some designated variable assignment
Y=T) can serve as an efficient certificate for the PIBNET decision problem
(i.e., as sufficient evidence to verify that P(Y = T) > 0 in polynomial time), as
indicated by (1). Thus, because PIBNETD is both NP-hard and in NP, it is
NP-complete. Futhermore, PIBNETD is NP-complete in the strong sense [10]
because all the numbers in the problem can be assigned a fixed precision.

Recall that PIBNET is a computational version of PIBNETD. That is, PIBNET
produces a numerical answer corresponding to the probability P(Y = T), rather
than merely determining whether this probability is greater than 0. It is clear
that PIBNETD can be readily transformed to PIBNET by simply having PIBNET
return “yes” if P(Y =T)>0, and ‘“‘no” otherwise. Thus, PIBNET is NP-hard.

5. Additional Complexity Results

In this section, the results of Section 4 are used as a framework for developing
several additional complexity results.

The use of 3SAT to prove that PIBNET is NP-hard has several advantages.
3SAT generically transforms to a belief-network problem that has a relatively
restricted network topology. Therefore, the computational complexity of
PIBNET clearly does not depend on the complexity of inference using arbitrarily
complex belief-network topologies. For example, consider the composition of

402 G.F. COOPER

the truth-setting component and clause-satisfaction-testing component of PIB-
NETD. This portion of PIBNETD defines a bipartite belief network that can be
used as one type of restricted diagnostic system model, where each node u,
corresponds to a disease and each node C;, corresponds to an item of evidence.
The definition of conditional probability often is applied as follows to calculate
the probability of a disease wu; given a set of evidence variables

{C,, C,,..., C,,} that are each instantiated to a particular value:
P(C,,C,,...,C,,| 4; =T)P(u, =T)
P(u,=T|C,,C,... at ma
(= TI Cr, Cass Gn) P(C,, Cy... Cy)
(5)
Therefore, determining the value of P(C,, C,,...,C,,) is of key importance

to determining the posterior probability of each u;. Recall that C, is the set of
instantiated variables that results from instantiating each CC, in
{C,, C,,..., C,,} to the value T. Inferring the value of P(C,) using a bipartite
belief-network representation answers the PIBNETD decision problem, and
therefore this inference task is NP-hard. Additionally, in [7] we show that
computing P(u,;=T|C,,C,,...,C,,) using a bipartite belief network is NP-
hard, even if (1) each item of evidence C, has at most three disease pre-
decessors, and (2) the conditional probability of each item of evidence given its
disease predecessors is described by a noisy OR-gate model [21, p. 184].

In addition to its structural simplicity, 3sAT is a problem that has been
studied extensively, and restricted versions of 3SAT have been proved NP-
complete. These restrictions can be used to derive direct corresponding
restrictions for probabilistic inference using belief networks. For example,
PLANAR 3SAT [18] can be used to show that inferring P(C,) in a bipartite belief
network is NP-hard, even if the bipartite belief network is restricted to be a
planar graph. Another known restriction states that 3sAT remains NP-hard
when, for each u, in U, there are at most 5 clauses in C that contain either
u,=T or u,=F [10, p. 259]. This restriction implies that the nodes in the
clause-satisfaction-testing component of the corresponding PIBNET problem
need only to have an outdegree of at most 5. Figure 1 indicates that the
clause-satisfaction-testing component of PIBNET determines the maximum out-
degree and indegree of nodes in a PIBNET network. Thus, PIBNET remains
NP-hard when the outdegree of any node is at most 5 and the indegree is at
most 3. Similarly, the problem of inferring P(C,) in a bipartite belief network
remains NP-hard when the outdegree is at most 5 and the indegree is at most 3.

6. Discussion

Probabilistic inference using certain restricted types of belief networks can be
performed efficiently. For example, there are known algorithms that can

COMPLEXITY OF INFERENCE 403

perform probabilistic inference using singly connected networks in time that is
linear as a function of the size of the belief network [20]. Probabilistic
inference using multiply connected networks with all variables instantiated to
specific values also requires only time linear in the size of the network. This
fact is apparent from equation (1), which demonstrates that only n products
are needed to calculate a particular instantiation of the n variables in any belief
network. However, inference using multiply connected networks containing
uninstantiated variables appears to be much more computationally difficult.
Currently, there are several algorithms for performing probabilistic inference
using multiply connected networks [17, 20,29]. All of them have a time
complexity that, in the worst case, is exponential as a function of the number
of uninstantiated variables in the network.

This paper has shown that probabilistic inference using general belief
networks is NP-hard. In particular, probabilistic inference using multiply
connected belief networks with uninstantiated variables is NP-hard. Knowing
that a problem is NP-hard is important, because it suggests that any attempt at
a general, exact, efficient solution is unlikely to be successful. Thus, attempts
to develop such an algorithm should be given very low priority.

Unfortunately, the representations of many complex, real-world domains,
such as medicine [24], seem generally to require large multiply connected
networks; furthermore, probabilistic inference using these networks typically
involves many uninstantiated variables—for example, the intermediate
pathophysiological states in medical belief networks. This situation suggests
that we should use different strategies, besides seeking a general, exact
algorithm, in attempting to achieve computationally tractable probabilistic
inference in such complex domains. Alternative strategies include average-
case, special-case, and approximation algorithms. We shall briefly discuss some
current research directions in developing approximation and _ special-case
methods.

Approximation algorithms produce an inexact, bounded solution, but
guarantee that the exact solution is within those error bounds. For example,
algorithms have been developed that bound a probability of the form P(x |Z),
where x is an instantiated variable and Z is a set of instantiated variables
{6, 14, 23]. The bounds are tightened incrementally as computation proceeds.
The question is then whether such absolute bounds can be made sufficiently
tight in an acceptable amount of time for the probability inference problems in
the domain. Researchers are just beginning to address this important empirical
question for certain domains, such as medicine.

A related method uses Monte Carlo simulation techniques to produce a
point-valued probability estimate, plus a standard error of that estimate [13].
As more computation time is expended, the standard error decreases. In this
case, the error bound is statistical, rather than absolute. Although Monte Carlo
simulation methods appear promising, current algorithms have extremely slow

404 G.F. COOPER

convergence properties in some cases [4], and thus are not always practical to
use.

Special-case algorithms are capable of efficient probabilistic inference for
special types of belief networks. For instance, as already mentioned, there are
linear-time algorithms for probabilistic inference using singly connected net-
works. A second example is an algorithm that is able to perform probabilistic
inference efficiently on many multiply connected networks that contain small
clusters of nodes [17]. Such techniques take advantage of the decomposability
of certain networks into node clusters. Similar techniques have been used to
solve some types of fault-tree problems [26] and network reliability problems
[27]. Decomposability is a powerful technique in solving many kinds of
network problems; we may be able to exploit it further in developing new
special-case belief-network inference algorithms. Belief networks that contain
restricted classes of probability functions or values also may be amenable to
efficient inference. Researchers are beginning to investigate the detailed classes
of belief networks for which current special-case inference algorithms are
computationally tractable.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

I thank Marty Chavez, Lyn Dupre, David Heckerman, Eddie Herskovits, Eric Horvitz, Richard
Lin, Judea Pearl, and Mike Wellman for valuable comments on earlier versions of this paper. This
work has been supported by grant IRI-8703710 from the National Science Foundation, grant
P-25514-EL from the U.S. Army Research Office, and grant LM-07033 from the National Library
of Medicine. Computer facilities were provided by the SUMEX-AIM resource under grant
RR-00785 from the National Institutes of Health.

REFERENCES

1. A.M. Agogino and A. Rege, IDES: Influence diagram based expert system, Math. Modelling
8 (1987) 227-233.

2. S. Andreassen, M. Woldbye, B. Falck and S.K. Andersen, MUNIN: A causal probabilistic
network for interpretation of electromyographic findings, in: Proceedings IJCAI-87, Milan,
Italy (1987).

3. R.M. Chavez and G.F. Cooper, KNET: Integrating hypermedia and normative Bayesian
modeling, in: Proceedings Workshop on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, Minneapolis, MN
(1988).

4. H.L. Chin and G.F. Cooper, Bayesian belief network inference using simulation, in: L.N.
Kanal, T.S. Levitt and J.F. Lemmer, eds., Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence 3 (North-
Holland, Amsterdam, 1989) 129-147.

5. S.A. Cook, The complexity of theorem-proving procedures, in: Proceedings Third Annual
ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, New York (1971) 151-158.

6. G.F. Cooper, NESTOR: A computer-based medical diagnostic aid that integrates causal and
probabilistic knowledge, Ph.D. Dissertation, Stanford University, Stanford, CA (1984).

7. G.F. Cooper, The computational complexity of probabilistic inference using belief networks,
Rept. KSL-87-27, Medical Computer Science Group, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
(1987).

COMPLEXITY OF INFERENCE 405

8.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

24.

25.

26.

27,

28.

29.

30.

G.F. Cooper, An algorithm for computing probabilistic propositions, in: L.N. Kanal, T.S.
Levitt and J.F. Lemmer, eds., Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence 3 (North-Holland, Am-
sterdam, 1989) 3-14.

. R.O. Duda, P.E. Hart and N.J. Nilsson, Subjective Bayesian methods for rule-based inference

systems, in: Proceedings 1976 National Computer Conference (1976).

M.R. Garey and D.S. Johnson, Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of
NP-Completeness (Freeman, New York, 1979).

I,J. Good, A causal calculus I, British J. Philos. Sci. 11 (1961) 305-318.

I.J. Good, A causal calculus II, British J. Philos. Sci. 12 (1962) 43-51.

M. Henrion, Propagating uncertainty by logic sampling in Bayes’ networks, in: L.N. Kanal and
J.F. Lemmer, eds., Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence 2 (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1988).
M. Henrion, Towards efficient probabilistic diagnosis in multiply-connected belief networks,
in: Proceedings Conference on Influence Diagrams, Berkeley, CA (1988).

M. Henrion and D.R. Cooley, An experimental comparison of knowledge engineering for
expert systems and for decision analysis, in: Proceedings AA AI-87, Seattle, WA (1987).

S. Holtzman, Intelligent Decision Systems (Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1989).

S.L. Lauritzen and D.J. Spiegethalter, Local computations with probabilities on graphical
structures and their application to expert systems, J. Roy. Stat. Soc. B50 (1988) 157-224.
D. Lichtenstein, Planar formulae and their uses, SIAM J. Comput. 11 (1982) 329-343.

N.J. Nilsson, Probabilistic logic, Artificial Intelligence 28 (1986) 71-87.

J. Pearl, Fusion, propagation, and structuring in belief networks, Artificial Intelligence 29
(1986) 241-288.

J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference
(Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1988).

J. Pearl and T.S. Verma, The logic of representing dependencies by directed graphs, in:
Proceedings AAAI-87, Seattle, WA (1987).

Y. Peng and J. Reggia, A comfort measure for diagnostic problem-solving, Inf. Sci. (to
appear).

H.E. Pople Jr, Heuristic methods for imposing structure on ill-structured problems: The
structuring of medical diagnostics, in: P. Szolovits, ed., Artificial Intelligence in Medicine
(Westview Press, Boulder, CO, 1982) 119-190.

J.S. Provan and M.O. Ball, The complexity of counting cuts and of computing the probability
that a graph is connected, SIAM J. Comput. 12 (1983) 777-788.

A. Rosenthal, A computer scientist looks at reliability computations, in: R.E. Barlow, J.B.
Fussell and N.D. Singpurwalla, eds., Reliability and Fault Tree Analysis (SIAM, Philadelphia,
PA, 1975) 133-152.

A. Rosenthal, Computing the reliability of complex networks, SIAM J. Appl. Math. 32 (1977)
384-393.

W.F. Rousseau, A method for computing probabilities in complex situations, Rept. 6252-2,
Center for Systems Research, Stanford University, Stanford, CA (1968).

R.D. Shachter, Intelligent probabilistic inference, in: L.N. Kanal and J.F. Lemmer, eds.,
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1986) 371-382.

J.M. Weiss, C.A. Kulikowski, S. Amarel and A. Safir, A model-based method for computer-
aided medical decision-making, Artificial Intelligence 11 (1978) 145-172.

Received May 1988; revised version received June 1989
