Cybernetics, Automata Studies,
and the Dartmouth Conference
on Artificial Intelligence

Ronald R. Kline

Cornell University

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing

The Dartmouth Summer Research Project on Artificial Intelligence,
held at Datrmouth College in 1956, is regarded as the official
“birthplace” of Al. This article draws on unpublished archives to shed
new light on the origins of the conference and the complex rela-
tionships between cybernetics, automata studies, and Al in the 1950s.

The Dartmouth Summer Research Project on
Artificial Intelligence, held at Dartmouth
College in Hanover, New Hampshire, in the
summer of 1956, is generally regarded by his-
torians and computer scientists as the “birth-
place” of AI.’ Pamela McCorduck argued that
two events mark its significance: the debut of
the ‘‘new paradigm” of symbolic information
processing, represented by Allen Newell and
Herbert Simon’s Logic Theorist computer
program, and the ‘‘social patterns” set by par-
ticipants who founded the early AI programs
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT), Stanford University, Carnegie Mellon
University, and the Stanford Research In-
stitute.” These institutions promoted the
approach that came to be called symbolic AI,
rather than the earlier method of brain mod-
eling, a neurophysiological approach associ-
ated with cybernetics and neural nets.
Participants at Dartmouth have disagreed
about how to characterize the conference’s
significance. Their interpretations range
from viewing it as a milestone in the field
of machine intelligence (Oliver Selfridge),
to being deeply disappointed that it was
not a collective research enterprise (John
McCarthy), to seeing Dartmouth as a “‘piece
of AI mythology” (Newell).*

My aim here is not to adjudicate these
varying interpretations, but to draw on
unpublished archives to shed new light on
the conference as well as the historical
relationships among cybernetics, automata
studies, and AI. I explore the disciplinary
boundary work done by researchers and the
Rockefeller foundation, which funded the
conference, to separate brain modeling from

Published by the IEEE Computer Society

symbolic processing during the editing of
the volume Automata Studies (1956) by
McCarthy and Claude Shannon and the
planning, funding, and conduct of the Dart-
mouth conference. I argue that we gain a bet-
ter understanding of the early history of Al,
and of cybernetics, by placing Automata Stud-
ies and the Dartmouth conference in the con-
text of the variety of research done under the
rubric of cybernetics at the time.

Cybernetics

One of the chief meanings of cybernetics
in the 1950s, which MIT mathematician
Norbert Wiener defined in Cybernetics
(1948) as the science of control and commu-
nication in the animal and machine,
centered on machine intelligence.* In the
book, Wiener dealt with the analogy between
the new digital electronic computers and the
supposed on/off characteristic of neurons in
the human brain, which neurophysiologist
Warren McCulloch and mathematician
Walter Pitts had formally established in a
1943 paper on the computability of neural
nets. The analogy was explored extensively
at the Macy Foundation conferences on
cybernetics chaired by McCulloch and held
from 1946 to 1953.° Wiener discussed the
possibility of a chess-playing computer pro-
gram in Cybernetics;° and several cybernetics
robots, such as Wiener’s moth/bedbug,
W. Ross Ashby’s homeostat, and W. Grey
Walter’s tortoises, were built in the early
1950s to simulate psychological and neuro-
logical functions. (Ashby was a British psy-
chiatrist and pathologist, and Grey Walter a
British neurophysiologist.”)

1058-6180/11/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE

6

Several participants at the Dartmouth con-
ference had been influenced by cybernetics.
Selfridge had proofread Wiener’s Cybernetics
as a graduate student at MIT, Marvin Minsky
had been ‘‘enamored” with McCulloch’s
work on neural nets, and Simon had relied
upon Ashby’s research, instead of Wiener’s,
to develop the idea that humans and com-
puters were adaptive information process-
ors.8 Later recollections also note the
importance of cybernetics in the early history
of Al. Minsky claimed that the advent of the
digital computer in the 1950s “‘made it prac-
tical to be much more ambitious” in de-
signing intelligent machines. As a result,
cybernetics divided, in my view, into three
chief avenues:’’ minimal self-organizing sys-
tems (represented by Ashby), simulating
human thought (represented by Newell and
Simon), and AI (represented by Minsky and
McCarthy).? Newell recalled that after the
mid-1950s, cybernetics split with AI over
the issues of “symbolic versus continuous
systems” and “psychology versus neuro-
physiology.” The break was not abrupt:

Through the early 1960s, all the researchers
concerned with mechanistic approaches to
mental functions knew about each other’s
work and attended the same conferences.
It was one big, somewhat chaotic, scientific
happening.!°

Many historians have also seen cybernetics as
an origin point for early AI."

Shannon, a mathematician at Bell Tele-
phone laboratories who founded the Ameri-
can school of information theory,’* also had
a strong interest in cybernetics and auto-
mata. He wrote early articles on programming
computers to play chess, corresponded on
the subject with Wiener (his former professor
at MIT), described his work in information
theory to McCulloch in 1949 under the rubric
of ‘Cybernetic’ questions,’”’ belonged to a cy-
bernetics study group in New York City in
1950, and built a relay-logic, maze-running
“mouse.”!3 While attending three Macy con-
ferences on cybernetics in the early 1950s,
where he presented research on both infor-
mation theory and automata, he got to
know McCulloch; Pitts; Grey Walter; engi-
neer Julian Bigelow, who coauthored a found-
ing paper on cybernetics with Wiener and
was John von Neumann’s chief engineer on
the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS) com-
puter project at Princeton; and Donald
MacKay, a founder of the British school of

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing

Cybernetics, Automata Studies, and the Dartmouth Conference on Artificial Intelligence

information theory who did research on
automata.'*

Although Shannon concentrated on infor-
mation theory, he maintained his interest in
cybernetics to the extent of writing the orig-
inal article on the subject for the Encyclopedia
Britannica. In that article, published in 1957,
he said that cybernetics “overlaps” several
fields, including information theory. Wiener
had referred the Britannica editor to Shan-
non to write the entry in his place.'®

Automata Studies
Shannon’s interest in cybernetics helps
us understand McCarthy’s experience co-
editing Automata Studies with Shannon
in the early 1950s, which led directly to
McCarthy organizing the 1956 Dartmouth
conference. McCarthy, who had worked
under Shannon at Bell Labs in the summer
of 1952 after finishing his PhD in mathemat-
ics at Princeton, recalled that he considered
Shannon’s title for the proposed book to be
too conservative and thus used the new
term “artificial intelligence’ when he pro-
posed a summer-long conference devoted to
the subject. Correspondence related to the
automata studies project gives us a glimpse
of these tensions, but it also indicates that
Shannon held a broader view of automata
studies than did McCarthy.'°

In line with Shannon’s interest in cyber-
netics, in 1953 he and McCarthy invited sev-
eral researchers who had attended the Macy
conferences on cybernetics to contribute to
the proposed volume, including Wiener,
MacKay, Ashby, Grey Walter, and von Neu-
mann. Familiar with Shannon’s theory of in-
formation, von Neumann had begun a series
of research on automata theory based on the
McCulloch-Pitts logical model of neural nets
and Turing machine theory.” Shannon and
McCarthy invited other prominent research-
ers in the theory of automata and neural
nets, including Alan Turing himself, whom
Shannon had met during World War II and
had visited in England;!® S.C. Kleene at
the University of Wisconsin-Madison, who
had written a paper on neural nets while
at RAND in 1951; and Albert Uttley, who
was designing conditional-probability neural
nets for pattern recognition for the British
military.'!? Minsky, who had also been hired
to work with Shannon at Bell Labs in the
summer of 1952,7° agreed to submit some-
thing from his doctoral dissertation on neu-
ral nets and brain modeling that he was
working on at Princeton. Wiener thought

highly of Minsky’s research, saying in a 1954
recommendation letter that it went ‘‘consid-
erably further than the best work to date of
such men as Ashby and Grey Walter.’”?

The British researchers Turing, MacKay,
Ashby, Grey Walter, and Uttley were regular
members of the Ratio Club, a group of neuro-
physiologists and mathematicians who had
worked on cybernetics before Wiener pub-
lished his book of that title. They held their
first meeting on the occasion of McCulloch’s
visit to England in 1949.7? In 1953, Turing re-
ferred directly to the cybernetic aspect of the
automata-studies enterprise in his response
to the invitation from Shannon and Mc-
Carthy to contribute a paper to the volume.
Turing had to beg off because he had “‘been
working on something quite different for
the last two years; viz. the mathematics of
morphogenesis, though I expect to get back
to cybernetics very shortly.’’73

McCarthy played a substantial role at the
beginning of the project. Prospective authors
corresponded with him in care of ‘‘Automata
Studies, Fine Hall’’ at Princeton. The young
McCarthy was not reticent in stating his
views on how the papers fit into his vision
of the field. MacKay’s paper discussed how
automata could symbolically represent the
external environment in a self-organizing,
adaptive manner and proposed an analog
electronic circuit, operating electromagnetic
gates, to illustrate the principle of statistical
negative feedback involved in his cybernetic
scheme. McCarthy told Shannon,

I think we should include it [the paper] with
whatever changes he wishes to make. I don’t
think that the eventual solution to this problem
will be an extension of his ideas, but I have no
very precise grounds for this opinion.”

After criticizing MacKay for making question-
able assumptions about sensory transforma-
tions based on the McCulloch-Pitts neural-net
model, McCarthy concluded, “Nevertheless,
I think the paper has a number of good
ideas and also represents a point of view
which cannot be dismissed as unfruitful this
early in the game.”**

McCarthy had more trouble with Mac-
Kay’s colleague Ross Ashby. Having gained
some prominence with the publication of
Design for a Brain (1952), which presented
his homeostat and a theory of adaptive be-
havior, Ashby interpreted the invitation
from Shannon and McCarthy as being an au-
tomatic acceptance for his paper, ‘‘Design of

John McCarthy played
a substantial role at
the beginning of the

Automata Studies
project.

an Intelligence Amplifier.’”” Ashby equated
“intelligence’”’ with the capacity to make ap-
propriate selections and extended his work
on the homeostat, an electromechanical de-
vice that adapted to changes in its ““environ-
ment” through a process of self-organization,
by randomly selecting states that would
eventually lead to stability (homeostasis).
Now, he presented the general principles for
designing a “selection amplifier,” which
would speed up the process and reach solu-
tions not contemplated by the designer,
resulting in an ‘‘amplification” of intelli-
gence.”° Ashby told McCarthy,

I am afraid I cannot consent to having it [his
paper] “refereed,” as it is on a subject to
which I have devoted a great deal of work,
and on which I can now speak with some
authority. Frankly, I know of no referee
to whose opinion I would defer (though
I would, of course, be prepared to answer
specific objections).”°

In contrast, MacKay welcomed referee reports
on his paper. McCarthy and Shannon ended
up accepting the Ashby and MacKay papers
without refereeing them.”” The experience
probably did nothing to improve McCarthy’s
opinion of Ashby, the dean of the English
cyberneticians.

Shannon and McCarthy divided the
articles into three categories: finite automata,
Turing machines, and synthesis of automata.
The categories were a subset of the subject
headings Shannon had used in a comprehen-
sive review of computers and automata re-
search published in 1953. They were also
part of his broad view, expressed in 1958,
of automata theory as a recent, ill-defined
“interdisciplinary science,’’ which spanned
symbolic logic and Turing machine theory,
nonnumerical (symbolic) programming
of computers, and neural nets.?® The only
category missing from the automata studies

October-December 2011

7

8

volume was that of symbol manipulation by
computers. Cybernetics was well represented;
almost half the papers (six of 13) were on the
theory and practice of neural nets. The Brit-
ish cyberneticians made up the entire section
on the synthesis of automata.

All in all, McCarthy was disappointed. He
wrote Shannon in mid-1954, “The collection
as a whole does not represent great progress
but is certainly representative of current
thought.””’ McCarthy’s expectations were
high. He thought the papers by the Ratio
Club group (Ashby, MacKay, and Uttley)
“contribute heuristic ideas of some value
but none lead directly to a solution of the
problem of thinking automata.” The papers
by Kleene and James Culbertson on neural
networks ‘‘solve problems of mainly formal
interest.’”” McCarthy thought his own paper
on Turing machines introduced ‘‘concepts
which may prove useful but does not get far
off the ground.’”’ Shannon’s paper was a
“short step in the direction of the theory of
computing rate [of Turing machines].”’ Von
Neumann’s paper on probabilistic, multi-
plexed, neural-net automata made from
unreliable components got the best mark:
“An important result, perhaps slightly off
the main track.””? Minsky’s paper had not
yet arrived for comment.*° Not surprisingly,
Shannon, who had praised Ashby’s homeo-
stat in print ‘‘as a basis for learning machines
and brain models,” had a better opinion of
the collected papers.*!

The tensions over editing Automata Studies
recalled by McCarthy surface in a letter he
wrote Shannon in late 1954. McCarthy had
written a draft of a preface to the volume.
“Tt consists mainly of a point of view on
how the various lines of investigation repre-
sented by the included papers may contrib-
ute to the eventual design of intelligent
machines.’’ The sentence is crossed out by a
wavy line, perhaps by Shannon, in the origi-
nal letter deposited at the Shannon Papers at
the Library of Congress. McCarthy also asked
some pointed questions of Shannon:

1. Do you agree that the book should be
regarded as a step in the direction of the
design of intelligent automata? Or is this
too presumptuous? Might it surprise the
contributors?

2. What about the title ‘Towards Intelligent
Automata”? Is it too bombastic? Others??”

Apparently Shannon did think Mc-
Carthy’s interpretation of the volume was

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing

Cybernetics, Automata Studies, and the Dartmouth Conference on Artificial Intelligence

“too presumptuous” and the proposed title
“too bombastic.”” The preface to the pub-
lished volume de-emphasized the goal of de-
signing “intelligent automata’ and spoke,
instead, in terms of the ‘‘analytic and syn-
thetic problems” of automata.** The title
remained the staid Automata Studies. Yet
Shannon sympathized with McCarthy’s
goal. He wrote his former high school science
teacher in 1952, ‘““My fondest dream is to
someday build a machine that really thinks,
learns, communicates with humans and
manipulates its environment in a fairly so-
phisticated way.’”?* Shannon also approved
the publication of papers by the Ratio Club
group, representing the British cybernetics
movement, on design principles of intelli-
gent automata.

McCarthy was not adverse to mentioning
cybernetics in the book’s preface. In the letter
to Shannon, he listed cybernetics as one of
six areas toward which the preface could, per-
haps, make ‘‘brief bows’’ (the others were
mathematical logic, statistics, communica-
tion theory, neurophysiology, and telephone
engineering).*° The published preface, signed
by McCarthy and Shannon, bowed toward all
these areas or to their practitioners by
name—except for cybernetics. The archives
do not indicate who deleted the reference
to cybernetics.

Rockefeller Funding

of the Dartmouth Seminar

The period from completing Automata Studies
to approaching the Rockefeller Foundation
to fund a summer seminar on AI was
short. Upon moving to Dartmouth College
in February 1955 to take up an assistant pro-
fessorship in mathematics, McCarthy sent
Shannon the final version of his paper for
the volume and said he was now free to do
additional editing on it and to visit Shannon
at Bell Labs.*° In early April, McCarthy had
an interview with Warren Weaver, director
of the Natural Sciences division of the Rock-
efeller Foundation, about the possibility of
funding a six-week summer seminar at Dart-
mouth for about 10 participants to work
together on brain theory and automata.
Weaver recorded in his program officer’s
diary, which was circulated within the foun-
dation, that McCarthy was confident that
Shannon and Nathaniel Rochester at IBM,
an architect of the IBM 701, would attend
and that their employers would pay their sal-
aries while they were at Dartmouth. Weaver
said he would think it over.?”

Weaver came to have mixed feelings
about the project and told McCarthy that
Robert Morison, director of the Biological
and Medical Research division of the founda-
tion, should handle the proposal,*® probably
because it dealt with brain models. Unable to
attend the scheduled lunch in mid-June be-
tween Morison, McCarthy, and Shannon,
whom McCarthy had enlisted to promote
the project, Weaver expressed his opinion
on the matter to Morison. An applied math-
ematician who had directed the foundation’s
funding of early computer projects such
as the Rockefeller Differential Analyzer,*?
Weaver felt it was ‘‘rather a ‘personal’ project,
in the sense that McC. [McCarthy] and two
or three other people would enjoy spending
some time together, talking about various
aspects of information theory” at someone
else’s expense. Weaver did not think the
foundation should support it on that basis.
On the other hand, Weaver had the highest
regard for Shannon, whose theory of infor-
mation he had popularized in the jointly
authored Mathematical Theory of Communica-
tion (1949) and thus worried about a conflict
of interest. “I think it is on the whole rather
better that I am not going to be at the lun-
cheon. My personal connection with the sub-
ject, especially since Claude Shannon is now
going to be present, tends to remove the dis-
cussion from the objective atmosphere in
which we ought to approach it.’*°

Shannon’s presence seems to have in-
clined Morison toward the proposal. Morison
recorded in his diary that McCarthy did al-
most all the talking at the meeting, with
Shannon only answering questions put to
him. ‘‘McCarthy strikes one as enthusiastic
and probably quite able in mathematics,”
Morison wrote, ‘‘but young and a bit
naive.” Participants suggested for the semi-
nar were McCarthy, Shannon, Rochester,
Minsky, von Neumann, Selfridge, and psy-
chologist Donald Hebb, who was well
known for his neural net theory of learning.
Having funded, in conjunction with Wea-
ver’s division the mathematical and neuro-
physiological research of Wiener and Arturo
Rosenblueth in the mid-1940s—which led
Wiener to write Cybernetics—Morison appar-
ently wanted to include someone from
Wiener’s group at MIT in the Dartmouth
conference. Morison said that Selfridge,
who was now a group leader at MIT’s
Lincoln Laboratory, ‘apparently strikes
M. [McCarthy] and S. [Shannon] as the
soundest and most amenable to group

activity of the various younger men who
have been associated with Norbert Wiener.”
Morison was alluding to the difficulties Wie-
ner and Rosenblueth had in obtaining consis-
tent work from the erratic, but brilliant
Walter Pitts during the Rockefeller-funded re-
search.*! Minsky might also have recom-
mended Selfridge, with whom he had
organized a session on machine intelligence
at the ACM’s Western Joint Computer Con-
ference in 1955.”

Two other prominent cybernetics re-
searchers were considered at the luncheon.
Despite their difficulties working with Ross
Ashby during the Automata Studies venture,
McCarthy and Shannon put forward Ashby
as “the most attractive foreign name.”
MacKay, whose research on information
theory and analog automata had been
funded by the Rockefeller Foundation since
1951 and whose paper was accepted for Au-
tomata Studies,** did not fare as well. Morison
recorded that ‘‘S. [Shannon] worries a good
deal about MacKay’s interest in theological
metaphysics.” Although MacKay, who also
wrote on the philosophy of science, main-
tained that his research in neuroscience and
his Christian faith were complementary,
not antagonistic, Shannon was apparently
concerned that MacKay’s religious views
would create frictions in an informal six-
week seminar. Morison suggested including
two psychologists, one of whom was Hans
Lukas Teuber at New York University, who
had coedited the proceedings of the Macy
conferences on cybernetics. Morison thought
both men had “enough breadth of education
and curiosity to have informed themselves,
at least fairly well, about cybernetics and
mathematical speculations’’**—one of the
few direct references to cybernetics in regard
to the Dartmouth conference.

Encouraged by the luncheon, McCarthy
organized a committee to prepare a proposal
to fund the conference. McCarthy, Shannon,
Minsky, and Rochester, with whom McCarthy
had worked at IBM in the summer of 1955,*°
finished their research sections of the pro-
posal by late August, and McCarthy submitted
it in early September 1955.*° As Paul Edwards
argued, the “still-nascent split between the
computer-brain and computer-mind meta-
phors already appears clearly’’ in the pro-
posal.4” Yet the proposal includes both
approaches as different aspects of a common
enterprise utilizing the computer as a research
tool. The introduction, probably written by
McCarthy, describes the “artificial intelligence

October-December 2011

9

10

problem” under seven headings: Automatic
Computers, How Can a Computer Be Pro-
grammed to Use a Language, Neuron Nets,
Theory of the Size of a Calculation, Self-
Improvement, Abstractions, and Randomness
and Creativity. The section on computer lan-
guages, McCarthy’s emergent research area,
was Clearly in the camp of what came to be
known as symbolic AI. The section on neural
nets mentioned the research of McCulloch
and Pitts; Uttley, who had contributed two
articles to Automata Studies; and two of the
organizers, Minsky and Rochester.*®

The research statements of the organizers
reveal the “nascent split’’ in more detail.
Three of the four organizers were on the
brain-modeling side. Shannon proposed
to work on two topics: the ‘Application
of information theory concepts to com-
puting machines and brain models” and
the “matched environment—brain model
approach to automata.”’ The first project
extended his previous work on computing
with unreliable components, which could
apply to computers and human brains. The
second project would focus on mathematiz-
ing the model of the brain’s “environment.”
Shannon concluded by saying he proposed
to “work up through a series of stages in
the direction of these advanced activities [of
human thought].” Minsky hoped to extend
his dissertation research and complete a
model of a trial-and-error learning neural
network that could be programmed on a
computer. Rochester wanted to continue
the research of his group at IBM on program-
ming neural nets on a computer to exhibit
originality when faced with a new problem
by inserting randomness into this type of
brain modeling. Only McCarthy leaned to-
ward symbolic processing by proposing to
“study the relation of language to intelli-
gence.” He criticized the brain-model
approach: “It seems clear that the direct ap-
plication of trial-and-error methods to the
relation between sensory data and motor
activity will not lead to any very complicated
behavior.” He thought trial-and-error meth-
ods should be applied at a “higher level of ab-
straction,” for example, with an English-like
“artificial language which a computer can
be programmed to use on problems requiring
conjecture and self-reference.’”*?

The proposal did not sit well with Morison
at the Rockefeller Foundation. He told
McCarthy in late September that the “‘pro-
posal is an unusual one and does not fall eas-
ily into our program [in biological and

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing

Cybernetics, Automata Studies, and the Dartmouth Conference on Artificial Intelligence

medical research] so I am afraid it will take
us a little time before coming to a deci-
sion.’’°° Not having heard from Morison by
early November, McCarthy asked Shannon
to approach Weaver and determine its sta-
tus.°' In late November, Morison finally
told McCarthy that the foundation could
not grant the requested funding of $13,500
for the seminar, but could support a smaller
effort at $7,500. Morison wrote,

I hope you won’t feel that we are being over-
cautious, but the general feeling here is that
this new field of mathematical models for
thought, though very challenging for the
long run, is still difficult to grasp very clearly.
This suggests a modest gamble for exploring a
new approach, but there is a great deal of hes-
itancy about risking any very substantial
amount at this stage.°?

McCarthy and the other organizers acqui-
esced and said they could get by with
$7,500.°? In deciding whom to invite,
McCarthy made what turned out to be a fate-
ful trip to visit Newell and Simon at the Car-
negie Institute of Technology (CIT, now
Carnegie Mellon University) in February
1956. By that date Newell and Simon, work-
ing at RAND’s Systems Research Laboratory,
had essentially completed the Logic Theorist,
one of the earliest software programs in sym-
bolic AI. Newell recalls that he was inspired
to work in this direction after hearing Self-
ridge give a talk on a pattern-recognition pro-
gram at RAND in 1954.**

During his visit to CIT, McCarthy showed
Newell and Simon the Rockefeller proposal
for the Dartmouth seminar. Simon wrote
Shannon after the visit, reintroducing him-
self by reminding Shannon of a RAND report
Simon had sent him on a chess-playing pro-
gram and enclosing a copy of an article of
his that bore on the research Shannon pro-
posed to do at Dartmouth. Then Simon
took the liberty of critiquing Shannon’s pro-
posed research. In light of the work he had
been doing with Newell, Simon said Shan-
non’s two separate projects—on using infor-
mation theory to analyze computing with
unreliable components, and modeling the
brain’s simplest environments—were actu-
ally one project. ‘‘Because of the rapid prog-
ress we have made in the last two months,”
Simon concluded, “we are inclined to reverse
the strategy expressed in the last sentence of
your proposal—we believe that we can start
with some of the most advanced human
activities—i.e., proving theorems—and work

back to the ‘simplest’—e.g., learning non-
sense syllables.’’ Newell planned to “spend
part of the summer at Dartmouth, and
I shall plan at least a week there at the begin-
ning, if this is agreeable to the ‘proposers.’”°*
McCarthy recommended Newell and Simon
to the other proposers, and Newell and
Simon wrote up their plans for doing re-
search at Dartmouth.°°

Shannon was slow to respond to Simon’s
rather challenging letter. Two months later,
in late April, Shannon wrote to Simon, apol-
ogized for the delay, and admitted he had
not done much research on learning
machines in the past two years. Shannon
was on the committee of a master’s student,
Trenchard More, at MIT, where Shannon
had recently been appointed a visiting pro-
fessor. Shannon said that More “has been
developing a program quite similar to that
you speak of for proving theorems in the
propositional calculus.’”’ Like the program
developed by Newell and Simon, More’s
could be simulated by hand. Perhaps to mol-
lify Newell and Simon, Shannon included an
announcement of the call for papers for the
Symposium on Information Theory, spon-
sored by the Institute of Radio Engineers’
(IRE) Professional Group on Information
Theory, to be held at MIT in September
1956 and suggested ‘‘that perhaps some of
the work you or Newell have been doing
would be suitable for presentation” in a spe-
cial session on learning machines.*”

The invitation pleased Newell and Simon,
but the implication that a master’s student of
Shannon’s was doing work comparable to
theirs irked them enough for Newell to
bring up the letter with some passion in an
interview conducted 35 years later:

So we have a letter [from Shannon]. And in
this letter there is some stuff about a guy by
the name of Trench Moore [sic], Trench was
a student of Shannon’s, and in fact Shannon
thought that what Trench was doing was infi-
nitely further ahead than what we were
doing. So there’s this funny little exchange
and counter exchange and so forth that
relates to what Trench is doing and so forth.*8

By May 1956, McCarthy had formalized
the arrangements for the seminar, which
was to be held from mid-June to mid-August
at Dartmouth College. McCarthy told the
Rockefeller Foundation that the participants
for the full period would be himself, Minsky,
MacKay, Ray Solomonoff, a colleague of

Minsky’s at MIT, John Holland from Roches-
ter’s group at IBM, and Jacob Bigelow. Shan-
non, Rochester, and Selfridge planned to
attend two weeks at the beginning of the
summer and two weeks at the end. Newell
and Simon would attend for two weeks at
the beginning. To help make up the Rockefel-
ler Foundation’s budget cut, IBM and Lincoln
Labs would pay the salaries of their employees
while they attended the seminar. McCarthy
hoped the conference would focus on his
area of research, telling Morison, “At present
it looks as though we shall concentrate on a
problem of devising a way of programming
a calculator to form concepts and to form
generalizations.”

The conference did not work out as
planned. Several of the participants listed by
McCarthy did not attend. MacKay, who was
probably added at the request of the Rock-
efeller Foundation, and whose travel from
Britain the foundation was funding from an-
other account, cancelled at the last moment.
He decided to stay with his wife who was or-
dered by her doctor to remain in bed follow-
ing a late delivery of their first child.°° That
removed an outspoken advocate of the cyber-
netic analog approach to brain modeling
from the seminar. Holland at IBM decided
not to attend because of previous commit-
ments, a decision he later regretted.°' Shan-
non did not make it either and probably
sent his student Trench More in his place,
most likely to continue the conversation
with Newell and Simon. Bigelow does not ap-
pear in accounts of the Dartmouth seminar.
New attendees included Herb Gerlertner
and Arthur Samuel, who wrote an early
checkers program.

The 10 official participants were thus
Gerlertner, McCarthy, Minsky, More, Newell,
Rochester, Samuel, Selfridge, Simon, and
Solomonoff. Alex Bernstein from IBM was a
visitor.°* Bernard Widrow (who received his
PhD from MIT that summer) and a colleague
heard about the conference, drove from
Cambridge to Dartmouth on their own ini-
tiative, and were welcomed by the group.
Widrow recalls that the group also included
W.A. Clark and B.G. Farley from Lincoln
Labs, who were probably visitors. Widrow
was “fascinated by the things I heard
{at Dartmouth] about artificial intelligence,”
which shaped his later research on adaptive
neural nets.°?

One reason there is uncertainty about
who attended the event is that McCarthy
did not prepare a report on it for the

October-December 2011

11

12

Rockefeller Foundation. He submitted only a
long paper written by Solomonoff on induc-
tive inference.®* In a letter promising to
write a report, McCarthy told the foundation
that at the session on automata at the IRE
Symposium on Information Theory, to be
held in September, “all of the speakers
(Simon, Newell, Rochester, Minsky, Solo-
monoff, and McCarthy] will be participants
in our summer project.’ Because they had
missed a deadline, only the papers by Newell
and Simon (on the Logic Theorist) and by
Rochester and his group (on neural net mod-
eling) would appear in the symposium’s
proceedings.®

Simon recalls some ‘‘tough negotiations”
about the session. McCarthy wanted to
chair it and summarize the research done at
Dartmouth. ‘‘And we [Simon and Newell]
allowed as how that wasn’t going to happen
and so poor Walter Rosenblith [a colleague
of Wiener’s at MIT]... who was supposed to
chair the session, walked around with us
around the M.I.T. campus, we strolled down
the Memorial Boulevard and so on, negotiat-
ing this... And finally it was agreed that John
McCarthy would get up and give a general
speech about what went on and then Al
[Newell] would present our work in particu-
lar.” Newell and Simon were satisfied with
the arrangements but felt the symposium’s
audience was not ready to understand their
information-processing approach to Al.
McCarthy later admitted that Newell and
Simon “felt, perhaps quite correctly, that
the situation was anomalous.’’°° Shannon
had stopped doing research on automata at
this time and gave a paper at the symposium
on coding for a noisy channel, which became
a classic in the booming field of information
theory.°”

The Rockefeller Foundation was unsure at
the time whether the Dartmouth conference
had been a success. It probably liked the fiscal
responsibility shown by the organizers and
Dartmouth College, which returned almost
$1,700 of the $7,500 grant as unspent
funds.°® But the foundation was dissatisfied
with the lack of a report. When Selfridge
spoke to Morison in mid-1957 about the pos-
sibility of the foundation providing travel
money for US researchers to attend a confer-
ence on AI at the National Physical Labora-
tory in Teddington, Britain, with Selfridge
and Minsky as the US organizers, Morison
had misgivings. As recorded in his diary, he
told Selfridge, ‘‘there has been a little feeling
here that we were not entirely well informed

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing

Cybernetics, Automata Studies, and the Dartmouth Conference on Artificial Intelligence

as to what went on at the conference held in
Hanover [New Hampshire] last summer.” Yet
Morison came away from the interview with
an ‘‘excellent impression of S. [Selfridge], and
there is no doubt about the qualifications of
most of the other people who would be
invited to the [Teddington] conference.”
The list included Minsky and McCarthy, as
well as such cybernetics researchers as Pitts
and Jerome Lettvin from McCulloch’s labora-
tory at MIT and Ashby and Uttley in Britain.
Shannon and MacKay were on the advisory
committee. Morison now acknowledged
that the “field is an important one and [is]
developing very rapidly.’ But a month
later, in June 1957, the Foundation said it
needed more information before funding
the conference.”°

Held in Teddington in late 1958, the
conference on ‘‘Mechanisation of Thought
Processes” marked a milestone in the history
of AI.’! Organized by Uttley in Britain and
Selfridge in the US, the conference gathered
together proponents of the main approaches
to machine intelligence of the day. Papers
were given by Minsky, McCarthy, and Self-
ridge on symbolic Al; by McCulloch, Uttley,
and Frank Rosenblatt of Cornell University
on neural nets; and by Ashby, MacKay, and
British cybernetician Gordon Pask on non-
neural-net self-organizing systems. Minsky
alluded to his conversion to the symbolic
method by noting that his proposed heuristic
computer program for solving problems in
plane geometry was based on notes he had
circulated at the Dartmouth conference.’”

Discussion

What do we learn from this detailed history,
based on unpublished archives, about the
relationships among cybernetics, automata
studies, and the Dartmouth conference
on Al?

First of all, the correspondence between
Shannon and McCarthy shows that Shannon
was not as conservative as McCarthy recalled.
Shannon shared McCarthy’s goal of creating
a science of intelligent machines, but he
held a broader view of viable approaches in
automata studies, which included neural
nets, Turing machines, cybernetic mecha-
nisms, and symbolic processing by computer.
Yet it is clear from the correspondence that
McCarthy’s dissatisfaction with the papers in
Automata Studies \ed him to ask the Rockefeller
Foundation to fund a conference on AI.

Second, the exchange between Simon and
Shannon reveals a sharp instance of how

disciplinary boundaries were increasingly
being drawn between brain modeling and
what became known as symbolic AI. Shan-
non pushed “non-numerical [i.e., symbolic]
programming’’—by writing an early article
on programming a computer to play chess
and supervising a graduate student’s thesis
on a theorem-proving program—but at Dart-
mouth he proposed to apply his research on
information theory to brain modeling and
then work up to higher thought processes.
Simon turned that research program upside
down, or right side up from Simon’s point
of view. Thus, even though Simon had
drawn heavily on Ashby’s work on brain
modeling, he contributed to the split in the
machine intelligence field evident in the
amended grant proposal sent to the Rockefel-
ler Foundation: between Simon, Newell, and
McCarthy on the symbolic side, and Shan-
non, Minsky, and Rochester on the brain-
modeling side.

Third, we gain a better understanding of
the Rockefeller Foundation’s role in funding
the Dartmouth conference. Although the
foundation had funded early computer proj-
ects and the mathematical-biological research
that inspired Wiener’s Cybernetics, it did not
play a leading role in shaping the related
new area of AI. Perhaps because Morison
handled the Dartmouth grant rather than
Weaver, who had managed the foundation’s
computer projects, the foundation was not
keen on funding the new field of ‘““mathemat-
ical models for thought,’”’ to use Morison’s
term. The foundation cut the requested fund-
ing nearly in half and apparently did not
fund travel to the Teddington conference in
1958, though Morison now had a higher
opinion of the field. The foundation unsuc-
cessfully tried to influence the direction of re-
search at Dartmouth by separately funding
MacKay’s travel to the conference.

One can only speculate how the presence
of MacKay—an outspoken proponent of the
analog, feedback approach to machine intel-
ligence associated with cybernetics—would
have changed the dynamics at Dartmouth
and its subsequent “mythology,” to use
Newell’s term. The question is especially apt
because McCarthy has recalled that,

As for myself, one of the reasons for inventing
the term “artificial intelligence” was to escape
association with ‘‘cybernetics.”’ Its association
with analog feedback seemed misguided, and
I wished to avoid having either to accept...
Wiener as a guru or having to argue with
him.”?

MacKay got his chance to debate Mc-
Carthy and Minsky at Teddington in 1958.
But by then, McCarthy and Minsky had
begun to gather ammunition from their re-
search at MIT with which to fight the battle
against brain modeling, especially Rose-
nblatt’s perceptrons.’*

More generally, the meaning of cybernet-
ics, which initially applied to all approaches
to machine intelligence, was increasingly
reduced in the US to neural nets and brain
modeling after the conference at Dartmouth.
Furthermore, MacKay and Uttley even be-
came wary of using the term in 1959 because
of its use in Britain by an investment scheme
involving research on artificial organisms.’*
In 1968, when Minsky credited cybernetics
with spawning three branches of machine in-
telligence, he effectively limited ‘‘cybernet-
ics’ to the brain-modeling work on self-
organizing systems conducted by members
of the Ratio Club in Britain and the Biological
Computer Laboratory at the University of
Illinois. Minsky’s genealogy helped mask
the pervasiveness of cybernetics in these for-
mative years, until the “revival’’ of neural
nets in the 1980s renewed the interest of his-
torians in the place of cybernetics in the early
history of AI, and the place of AI in the his-
tory of early cybernetics.”°

Acknowledgments

The research for this article was funded by
the US National Science Foundation, under
grant SES80689, and by the Bovay Program
in History and Ethics of Engineering at Cor-
nell University. I thank David Hounshell for
sharing his copies of the Rockefeller Founda-
tion file on the Dartmouth conference with
me as well as Herbert Voelcker and the anon-
ymous referees for their comments on earlier
drafts.

References and Notes

1. See, for example, J. Moor, ‘The Dartmouth Col-
lege Artificial Intelligence Conference: The Next
Fifty Years,” Al Magazine, 27, no. 4, 2006,
pp. 87-91; P. McCorduck, Machines Who
Think, W.H. Freeman, 1979, ch. 5; P. Edwards,
Closed World: Computers and the Politics of
Discourse in Cold War America, MIT Press, 1996,
p. 239; and R. Cordeschi, The Discovery of the
Artificial: Behavior, Mind, and Machines Before
and Beyond Cybernetics, Dordrecht, 2002,
pp. 155, 174.

2. McCorduck, Machines Who Think,pp. 96,
109-110.

October-December 2011

13

Cybernetics, Automata Studies, and the Dartmouth Conference on Artificial Intelligence

COON

10.

11

12.

13.

14.

. McCorduck, Machines Who Think,pp. 95-96;
and A.L. Norberg, ‘An Interview with Allen
Newell,’” 10-12 June 1991, Oral History Collec-
tion, Charles Babbage Inst., Univ. of Minnesota
(hereafter CBI Oral History), p. 116.

. R.R. Kline, “Where Are the Cyborgs in Cyber-
netics?” Social Studies of Science, vol. 33, no. 3,
2009, pp. 335-336.

. S.J. Heims, The Cybernetics Group, MIT Press,
1991.

. N. Wiener, Cybernetics: Or Control and Commu-
nication in the Animal and the Machine, Technol-
ogy Press, 1948, pp. 193-194.

. Cordeschi, Discovery of the Artificial,pp. 155-163.

. F. Conway and J. Siegelman, Dark Hero of the
Information Age: In Search of Norbert Wiener, the
Father of Cybernetics, Basic Books, 2005, p. 175;
McCorduck, Machines Who Think, p. 84; A.L.
Norberg, ‘An Interview with Marvin L. Minsky,’
1 Nov. 1989, CBI Oral History, pp. 10-12; H.
Crowther-Heyck, Herbert A. Simon: The Bounds
of Reason in Modern America, Johns Hopkins
Univ. Press, 2005, pp. 189-192; and H.
Crowther-Heyck, ‘Defining the Computer: Her-
bert Simon and the Bureaucratic Mind—Part 2,”
IEEE Annals of the History of Computing, vol. 30,
no. 2, 2008, p. 53.

. M. Minsky, ed., Semantic Information Processing,

MIT Press, 1968, p. 7.

A. Newell, ‘Intellectual Issues in the History

of Artificial Intelligence,” The Study of Informa-

tion: Interdisciplinary Messages,F. Machlup,

and U. Mansfield, eds., John Wiley, 1983,

pp. 191, 201.

. See, for example, McCorduck, Machines Who

Think, ch. 4; Edwards, Closed World, ch. 8; and

Cordeschi, Discovery of the Artificial, ch. 5.

W. Aspray, ‘The Scientific Conceptualization of

Information: A Survey,” Annals of the History of

Computing, vol. 7, no. 2, 1985, pp. 117-140.

C. Shannon, ‘‘Programming a Computer for

Playing Chess,’’ 1950, reprinted in Shannon,

Collected Papers, N.J.A. Sloane, and A.D. Wyner,

eds., IEEE Press, 1993, pp. 637-656; C. Shan-

non, to N. Wiener, 13 Oct. 1948, Norbert Wie-
ner Papers, Inst. Archives, MIT (hereafter Wiener

Papers), box 6-85; C. Shannon, to N. Wiener,

14 Feb. 1949, Wiener Papers, box 6-91;

E. Coleman, to N. Wiener, 12 May 1950,

Wiener Papers, box 8-117; C. Shannon, to

W. McCulloch, 2 June 1949, Warren McCulloch

Papers, Am. Philosophical Soc. (hereafter

McCulloch Papers), Shannon correspondence;

and C. Shannon, ‘Presentation of a Maze-

Solving Machine,’’ 1952, reprinted in Shannon,

Collected Papers, pp. 681-687.

Heims, Cybernetics Group, especially pp. 11, 75,

76, 78, 111-112, 221.

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing

15.

16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

C. Shannon, “Cybernetics,” Encyclopedia Bri-
tannica, vol. 6, 1957, p. 916, and N. Wiener

to W. Yust, 30 Aug. 1954, Wiener Papers, box
14-199.

McCorduck, Machines Who Think, pp. 94, 96-97.
C. Shannon and J. McCarthy to N. Wiener,

19 May 1953, Wiener Papers, box 12-173.

D. MacKay to J. McCarthy, 9 Oct. 1953;

W.G. Walter to C. Shannon and J. McCarthy,

11 June 1953; J. von Neumann to C. Shannon
and J. McCarthy, 15 June 1953; and W.R. Ashby
to J. McCarthy, 16 June 1954—all in Claude
Shannon Papers, Library of Congress (hereafter
Shannon Papers), box 1. On von Neumann’s
theory of automata, see W. Aspray, John von
Neumann and the Origins of Modern Computing,
MIT Press, 1990, ch. 8.

A. Turing to C. Shannon, 3 June 1953, Shan-
non Papers, box 1; and A. Hodges, Alan Turing:
The Enigma, Simon and Shuster, 1983. For my
research, | used the reprinted edition of Hodges’
Alan Turing by Walker, 2000, pp. 249-251, 441.
S.C. Kleene to C. Shannon and J. McCarthy,

29 May 1954, and A. Uttley to J. McCarthy,

20 Oct. 1953, both in Shannon Papers, box 1.
McCorduck, Machines Who Think, p. 94.

N. Wiener to C. Brinton, 4 Mar. 1954, Wiener
Papers, box 13-189.

P. Husbands and O. Holland, ‘‘The Ratio Club:
A Hub of British Cybernetics,’” The Mechanical
Mind in History, P. Husbands, O. Holland, and
M. Wheeler, eds., MIT Press, 2008, ch. 6,

p. 90, 93.

A. Turing to C. Shannon, 3 June 1953, Shannon
Papers, box 1.

J. McCarthy to C. Shannon, 5 Apr. 1954, Shan-
non Papers, box 1; and D. MacKay, “The Epis-
temological Problem for Automata,” Automata
Studies, C. Shannon and J. McCarthy, eds.,
Princeton Univ. Press, 1956, pp. 235-251.

W.R. Ashby, ‘Design for an Intelligence Ampli-
fier,’ Automata Studies, pp. 215-234; P.M.
Asaro, “From Mechanisms of Adaptation to In-
telligent Amplifiers: The Philosophy of W. Ross
Ashby,”’ Mechanical Mind in History, ch. 7; and
A. Pickering, ‘‘Cybernetics and the Mangle:
Ashby, Beer, and Pask,’’ Social Studies of Science,
vol. 32, no. 3, 2002, pp. 413-437.

W.R. Ashby to J. McCarthy, 16 June 1954, Shan-
non Papers, box 1.

D. MacKay to J. McCarthy, 9 Oct. 1953, and

J. McCarthy, to C. Shannon, 11 Aug. 1954,
both in Shannon Papers, box 1.

C. Shannon, ‘“Computers and Automata,’’ 1953,
reprinted in Shannon, Collected Papers, pp. 703-
710; and C. Shannon, ‘‘Von Neumann’s Contri-
butions to Automata Theory,’”’ 1958, reprinted
in Shannon, Collected Papers, p. 831.

29. J. McCarthy to C. Shannon, 11 Aug. 1954,
Shannon Papers, box 1.

30. M. Minsky, to C. Shannon, 18 Jan. 1954
[1955], Shannon Papers, box 1.

31. Shannon, “Computers and Automata,”’ p. 709.

32. J. McCarthy to C. Shannon, 24 Nov. 1954,
Shannon Papers, box 1.

33. J. McCarthy to C. Shannon, “Preface,”” Autom-
ata Studies, p. v.

34. C. Shannon to I. Angus, 8 Aug. 1952, Shannon
Papers, box 1.

35. J. McCarthy to C. Shannon, 24 Nov. 1954,
Shannon Papers, box 1.

36. J. McCarthy to C. Shannon, 18 Feb. 1955,
Shannon Papers, box 1.

37. W. Weaver diary, 4 Apr. 1955, Rockefeller
Foundation Archives (hereafter RF-Dartmouth
File), record group 1.0002, series 200, box 26,
folder 219.

38. W. Weaver to John McCarthy, 7 June 1955,
RF-Dartmouth File.

39. D.A. Mindell, Between Human and Machine:

Feedback, Control, and Computing before

Cybernetics, Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 2002,

pp. 170-174.

W. Weaver to Robert Morison, 14 June 1955, RF-

Dartmouth File; and C. Shannon and W. Weaver,

The Mathematical Theory of Communication,

Univ. of Illinois Press, 1949, pp. 93-117.

41.R. Morison diary, 17 June 1955, RF-Dartmouth
File. On Selfridge and the other young research-
ers in Wiener’s group, see Conway and Siegel-
man, Dark Hero of the Information Age,
pp. 142-143, 201-204.

42. P. Husbands, ‘‘An Interview with Oliver Selfridge,”
Mechanical Mind in History, ch. 17, p. 399.

43. McCorduck, Machines Who Think, pp. 79-80; R.
Morison, ‘Amendment of Grant in Aid GA NSA
5416 and Extension GA BMR 5607 to the Uni-
versity of London, King’s College, England,” 15
Feb. 1957; and “Research Report, 1954:55 D.
M. MacKay, Information Systems Group,”’
attached to MacKay to Morison, 21 Nov. 1955.
Both documents are in Rockefeller Foundation
Archives (hereafter RF-MacKay), record group
1.2, series 401, box 19, folder 179.

44. R. Morison diary, 17 June 1955, RF-Dartmouth
File.

45. W. Aspray, ‘An Interview with John McCarthy,”

2 Mar. 1989, CBI Oral History, p. 8.

J. McCarthy to R. Morison, 2 Sept. 1955,

RF-Dartmouth File.

47. Edwards, Closed World, p. 253.

48. J. McCarthy et al., “A Proposal for the Dart-
mouth Summer Research Project on Artificial In-
telligence,’’ 31 Aug. 1955, RF-Dartmouth File,
pp. 1-3; introduction reprinted in Al Magazine,
vol. 27, Winter 2006, pp. 12-14.

40.

46.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

McCarthy et al., ““A Proposal for the Dartmouth
Summer Research Project on Artificial Intelli-
gence,” pp. 6, 7, 16, 17.

R. Morison to J. McCarthy, 22 Sept. 1955,
RF-Dartmouth File.

J. McCarthy to C. Shannon, 7 Nov. 1955,
Shannon Papers, box 1.

R. Morison to J. McCarthy, 30 Nov. 1955,
RF-Dartmouth File.

J. McCarthy to R. Morison, 8 Dec. 1955. On
the revised budget, see D. Morrison to R.
Morison, 19 Dec. 1955. Both letters are in
RF-Dartmouth File.

McCorduck, Machines Who Think, pp. 132-
135, and Crowther-Heyck, Herbert A. Simon,
ch. 10.

H. Simon to C. Shannon, 21 Feb. 1956, Shan-
non Papers, box 2.

J. McCarthy to N. Rochester, C. Shannon, and
M. Minsky, 23 Feb. 1956, Shannon Papers,
box 2; and A. Newell and H. Simon, ‘Plans
for the Dartmouth Summer Research Project
on Artificial Intelligence,” 6 Mar. 1956, Simon
Papers, box 38, CMU, Problem Solving

Paper 9.

C. Shannon to H. Simon, 24 Apr. 1956, Shan-
non Papers, box 2.

“An Interview with Allen Newell,” p. 12. | have
found no documentation of these exchanges.
J. McCarthy to R. Morison, 25 May 1955,
RF-Dartmouth File.

D. MacKay to W. McCulloch, 23 Jul. 1956,
McCulloch Papers, MacKay Correspondence;
and D. MacKay to W. Weaver, 26 June 1956,
RF-MacKay.

P. Husbands, ‘‘An Interview with John Holland,”’
Mechanical Mind in History,p. 389.

“An Interview with Allen Newell,” p. 12, and
McCorduck, Machines Who Think, p. 94.
“TInterview with] Bernard Widrow,”’ Talking
Nets: An Oral History of Neural Networks, J.A.
Anderson and E. Rosenfeld, eds., MIT Press,
1998, ch. 3, p. 49.

J. McCarthy to [R. Morison], 18 Nov. 1956,
RF-Dartmouth File.

J. McCarthy to R. Morison, 3 Sept. 1956,
RF-Dartmouth File.

H. Simon, interview by P. McCorduck, 6 Nov.
1974, Simon Papers, box 79, transcript 2,

p. 17; and McCorduck, Machines Who Think,
p. 108.

C. Shannon, ‘‘The Zero Capacity for a Noisy
Channel,” 1956, reprinted in Shannon, Collected
Papers, pp. 221-238.

S. Welch, Dartmouth College, financial report
to Rockefeller Foundation, 7 Feb. 1957; and

R. Steel to S. Welch, 15 Feb. 1957. Both are in
RF-Dartmouth File.

October-December 2011. 15

16

Cybernetics, Automata Studies, and the Dartmouth Conference on Artificial Intelligence

69

70.

71.
72.

73.

74,

75.

76.

. R. Morison diary, 8 May 1957, RF-Dartmouth
File. On the conference proposal, see M. Minsky
and O. Selfridge to P.M. Woodward, 11 Feb.
1957, attached to R. Morison to W. Weaver,
n.d., RF-Dartmouth File.

R. Anderson to O. Selfridge, 10 June 1957,
RF-Dartmouth File.

Cordeschi, Discovery of the Artificial, p. 187.

M. Minsky, ‘Some Methods of Artificial Intelli-
gence and Heuristic Programming,’’ Mechanisa-
tion of Thought Processes, proc. 1958 symp.
held at the Nat’l Physical Lab., vol. 1, HMSO,
1959, pp. 3-26.

John McCarthy, “[Review of] Bloomfield, Brian, ed.
The Question of Artificial Intelligence... ,’” Annals
of the History of Computing, vol. 10, 1988, p. 227.
M. Olazarin, ‘“A Sociological Study of the Offi-
cial History of the Perceptrons Controversy, ’’
Social Studies of Science, vol. 26, no. 3, 1996,
pp. 611-659.

Kline, “Where Are the Cyborgs in Cybernetics,’’
p. 353.

See, for example, Cordeschi, Discovery of the
Artificial, Husbands, Holland, and Wheeler, eds.,

Mechanical Mind in History; and A. Mueller and

K. Mueller, eds., An Unfinished Revolution? Heinz
von Foerster and the Biological Computer Labora-
tory, BCL, 1958-1976, Echoraum, 2007.

F) Ronald R. Kline is the
Bovay Professor in History
and Ethics of Engineering at
Cornell University, holding a
joint appointment between
the Science and Technology
Studies Department and the
; School of Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering. He is president of the Society
for the History of Technology and is completing
a book on the history of cybernetics and informa-
tion theory in the US. Kline has a PhD in the his-
tory of science from the University of Wisconsin-—
Madison. Contact him at rrk1@cornell.edu.

Selected CS articles and columns are also
cn available for free at http://ComputingNow.
computer.org.

lll The MIT Press

Re

Eden Medina

Cybernetic Revolutionaries
Technology and Politics in Allende’s Chile

“This wonderful book explores cybernetics in Allende’s Chile. In

ig so doing, it blends social and technical issues with large scale
7 CYBERNETIC economic planning and the dynamic politics of the time. It is a

312 pp., 41 illus., $32 cloth

Now in Paper

Internet Alley

Paul E. Ceruzzi

a rival to Silicon Valley.”

terested in the incorporation of science and technology studies
into historical and political discourse”

— Geoffrey C. Bowker, University of Pittsburgh

@ REVOLUTIONARIES must-read for anyone interested in this era, and for anyone in-
Ay
a
/g

High Technology in Tysons Corner, 1945-2005

“Rich in persuasive detail, Cerruzi’s /nternet Alley is a lively narra-
tive and eye-opening account that tells the unheralded story of

— Tom Hughes, author of Human-Built World

Lemelson Center Studies in Invention and Innovation series + 256 pp., 24 illus., $14.95 paper

To order call 800-405-1619 » http://mitpress.mit.edu - Visit our e-books store: http://mitpress-ebooks.mit.edu

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing
