Machine Learning 3: 9-44, 1988
© 1988 Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston - Manufactured in The Netherlands

Learning to Predict by the Methods
of Temporal Differences

RICHARD S. SUTTON (RICH@GTE.COM)
GTE Laboratories Incorporated, 40 Syluan Road, Waltham, MA 02254, U.S.A.

(Received: April 22, 1987)
(Revised: February 4, 1988)

Keywords: Incremental learning, prediction, connectionism, credit assignment,
evaluation functions

Abstract. This article introduces a class of incremental learning procedures spe-
cialized for prediction — that is, for using past experience with an incompletely known
system to predict its future behavior. Whereas conventional prediction-learning
methods assign credit by means of the difference between predicted and actual out-
comes, the new methods assign credit by means of the difference between temporally
successive predictions. Although such temperal-difference methods have been used in
Samuel’s checker player, Holland’s bucket brigade, and the author’s Adaptive Heuris-
tic Critic, they have remained poorly understood. Here we prove their convergence
and optimality for special cases and relate them to supervised-learning methods. For
most real-world prediction problems, temporal-difference methods require less mem-
ory and less peak computation than conventional methods and they produce more
accurate predictions. We argue that most problems to which supervised learning
is currently applied are really prediction problems of the sort to which temporal-
difference methods can be applied to advantage.

1. Introduction

This article concerns the problem of learning to predict, that is, of using past
experience with an incompletely known system to predict its future behavior.
For example, through experience one might learn to predict for particular
chess positions whether they will lead to a win, for particular cloud formations
whether there will be rain, or for particular economic conditions how much
the stock market will rise or fall. Learning to predict is one of the most
basie and prevalent kinds of learning. Most pattern recognition problems, for
example, can be treated as prediction problems in which the classifier must
predict the correct classifications. Learning-to-predict problems aiso arise in
heuristic search, e.g., in learning an evaluation function that predicts the utility
of searching particular parts of the search space, or in learning the underlying
model of a problem domain. An important advantage of prediction learning is
that its training examples can be taken directly from the temporal sequence
of ordinary sensory input; no special supervisor or teacher is required.

10 R. 8. SUTTON

In this article, we introduce and provide the first formal results in the theory
of temporal-difference (TD) methods, a class of incremental learning procedures
specialized for prediction problems. Whereas conventional prediction-learning
methods are driven by the error between predicted and actual outcomes, TD
methods are similarly driven by the error or difference between temporally
successive predictions; with them, learning occurs whenever there is a change
in prediction over time. For example, suppose a weatherman attempts to
predict on each day of the week whether it will rain on the following Saturday.
The conventional approach is to compare each prediction to the actual outcome
~ whether or not it does rain on Saturday. A TD approach, on the other hand,
is to compare each day’s prediction with that made on the following day. If
a 50% chance of rain is predicted on Monday, and a 75% chance on Tuesday,
then a TD method increases predictions for days similar to Monday, whereas
a conventional method might either increase or decrease them depending on
Saturday’s actual outcome.

We will show that TD methods have two kinds of advantages over con-
ventional prediction-learning methods. First, they are more incremental and
therefore easier to compute. For example, the TD method for predicting Sat-
urday’s weather can update each day’s prediction on the following day, whereas
the conventional method must wait until Saturday, and then make the changes
for all days of the week. The conventional method would have to do more com-
puting at one time than the TD method and would require more storage during
the week. The second advantage of TD methods is that they tend to make
more efficient use of their experience: they converge faster and produce bet-
ter predictions. We argue that the predictions of TD methods are both more
accurate and easier to compute than those of conventional methods.

The earliest and best-known use of a TD method was in Samuel’s (1959)
celebrated checker-playing program. For each pair of successive game positions,
the program used the difference between the evaluations assigned to the two
positions to modify the earlier one’s evaluation. Similar methods have been
used in Holland’s (1986) bucket brigade, in the author’s Adaptive Heuristic
Critic (Sutton, 1984; Barto, Sutton & Anderson, 1983), and in learning systems
studied by Witten (1977), Booker (1982), and Hampson (1983). TD methods
have also been proposed as models of classical conditioning (Sutton & Barto,
1981a, 1987; Gelperin, Hopfield & Tank, 1985; Moore et al., 1986; Klopf, 1987).

Nevertheless, TD methods have remained poorly understood. Although they
have performed well, there has been no theoretical understanding of how or
why they worked. One reason is that they were never studied independently,
but only as parts of larger and more complex systems. Within these systems,
TD methods were used to improve evaluation functions by better predicting
goal-related events such as rewards, penalties, or checker game outcomes. Here
we advocate viewing TD methods in a simpler way - as methods for efficiently
learning to predict arbitrary events, not just goal-related ones. This simplifica-
tion allows us to evaluate them in isolation and has enabled us to obtain formal
results. In this paper, we prove the convergence and optimality of TD meth-
ods for important special cases, and we formally relate them to conventional
supervised-learning procedures.

TEMPORAL-DIFFERENCE LEARNING ll

Another simplification we make in this paper is to focus on numerical predie-
tion processes rather than on rule-based or symbolic prediction (e.g., Dietterich
& Michalski, 1986). The approach taken here is much like that used in connec-
tionism and in Samuel’s original work - our predictions are based on numerical
features combined using adjustable parameters or “weights.” This and other
representational assumptions are detailed in Section 2.

Given the current interest in learning procedures for multi-layer connec-
tionist networks (e.g., Rumelhart, Hinton, & Williams, 1985; Ackley, Hinton,
& Sejnowski, 1985; Barto, 1985; Anderson, 1986; Williams, 1986; Hampson
& Volper, 1987), we note that here we are concerned with a different set of
issues. The work with multi-layer networks focuses on learning input-output
mappings of more complex functional forms. Most of that work remains within
the supervised-learning paradigm, whereas here we are interested in extending
and going beyond it. We consider mostly mappings of very simple functional
forms, because the differences between supervised learning methods and TD
methods are clearest in these cases. Nevertheless, the TD methods presented
here can be directly extended to multi-layer networks (see Section 6.2).

The next section introduces a specific class of temporal-difference procedures
by contrasting them with conventional, supervised-learning approaches. focus-
ing on computational issues. Section 3 develops an extended example that
illustrates the potential performance advantages of TD methods. Section 4
contains the convergence and optimality theorems and discusses TD methods
as gradient descent. Section 5 discusses how to extend TD procedures, and
Section 6 relates them to other research.

2. Temporal-difference and supervised-learning
approaches to prediction

Historically, the most important learning paradigm has been that of super-
vised learning. In this framework the learner is asked to associate pairs of
items. When later presented with just the first item of a pair, the learner is
supposed to recall the second. This paradigm has been used in pattern clas-
sification, concept acquisition, learning from examples, system identification,
and associative memory. For example, in pattern classification and concept
acquisition, the first item is an instance of some pattern or concept, and the
second item is the name of that concept. In system identification, the learner
must reproduce the input-output behavior of some unknown system. Here, the
first item of each pair is an input and the second is the corresponding output.

Any prediction problem can be cast in the supervised-learning paradigm by
taking the first item to be the data based on which a prediction must be made,
and the second item to be the actual outcome, what the prediction should have
been. For example, to predict Saturday's weather, one can form a pair from the
measurements taken on Monday and the actual observed weather on Saturday.
another pair from the measurements taken on Tuesday and Saturday‘s weather,
and so on. Although this pairwise approach ignores the sequential structure
of the problem, it is easy to understand and analyze and it has been widely
used. In this paper, we refer to this as the supervised-learning approach to

12 R. 8S. SUTTON

prediction learning, and we refer to learning methods that take this approach
as supervised-learning methods. We argue that such methods are inadequate,
and that TD methods are far preferable.

2.1 Single-step and multi-step prediction

To clarify this claim, we distinguish two kinds of prediction-learning prob-
lems. In single-step prediction problems, all information about the correctness
of each prediction is revealed at once. In multi-step prediction problems, cor-
rectness is not revealed until more than one step after the prediction is made,
but partial information relevant to its correctness 1s revealed at each step.
For example, the weather prediction problem mentioned above is a multi-step
prediction problem because inconclusive evidence relevant to the correctness
of Monday’s prediction becomes available in the form of new observations on
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday. On the other hand, if each day’s
weather were to be predicted on the basis of the previous day’s observations —
that is, on Monday predict Tuesday’s weather, on Tuesday predict Wednesday’s
weather, etc. — one would have a single-step prediction problem, assuming no
further observations were made between the time of each day’s prediction and
its confirmation or refutation on the following day.

In this paper, we will be concerned only with multi-step prediction problems.
In single-step problems, data naturally comes in observation—outcome pairs;
these problems are ideally suited to the pairwise supervised-learning approach.
Temporal-difference methods cannot be distinguished from supervised-learning
methods in this case; thus the former improve over conventional methods only
on multi-step problems. However, we argue that these predominate in real-
world applications. For example, predictions about next year’s economic per-
formance are not confirmed or disconfirmed all at once, but rather bit by bit
as the economic situation is observed through the year. The likely outcome
of elections is updated with each new poll, and the likely outcome of a chess
game is updated with each move. When a baseball batter predicts whether a
pitch will be a strike, he updates his prediction continuously during the ball’s
flight.

In fact, many problems that are classically cast as single-step prediction
problems are more naturally viewed as multi-step problems. Perceptual learn-
ing problems, such as vision or speech recognition, are classically treated as
supervised learning, using a training set of isolated, correctly-classified input
patterns. When humans hear or see things, on the other hand, they receive a
stream of input over time and constantly update their hypotheses about what
they are seeing or hearing. People are faced not with a single-step problem of
unrelated pattern-class pairs, but rather with a series of related patterns, all
providing information about the same classification. To disregard this struc-
ture seems improvident.

2.2 Computational issues

In this subsection, we introduce a particular TD procedure by formally re-
lating it to a classical supervised-learning procedure, the Widrow-Hoff rule.

TEMPORAL-DIFFERENCE LEARNING 13

We show that the two procedures produce exactly the same weight changes,
but that the TD procedure can be implemented incrementally and therefore
requires far less computational power. In the following subsection, this TD
procedure will be used also as a conceptual bridge to a larger family of TD
procedures that produce different weight changes than any supervised-learning
method. First, we detail the representational assumptions that will be used
throughout the paper.

We consider multi-step prediction problems in which experience comes in
observation-outcome sequences of the form 21,22, 23,...,2%m,2, where each 2;
is a vector of observations available at time ¢ in the sequence, and <z is the
outcome of the sequence. Many such sequences will normally be experienced.
The components of each xz; are assumed to be real-valued measurements or
features, and z is assumed to be a real-valued scalar. For each observation-
outcome sequence, the learner produces a corresponding sequence of predic-
tions P,, P2, P3,...,Pm, each of which is an estimate of z. In general, each P,
can be a function of all preceding observation vectors up through time tf, but,
for simplicity, here we assume that it is a function only of z;.! The predictions
are also based on a vector of modifiable parameters or weights, w. P,’s func-
tional dependence on 2; and w will sometimes be denoted explicitly by writing
it as Pla, w).

All learning procedures will be expressed as rules for updating w. For the
moment we assume that w is updated only once for each complete observation-
outcome sequence and thus does not change during a sequence. For each
observation, an.increment to w, denoted Aw;, is determined. After a complete
sequence has been processed, w is changed by (the sum of) all the sequence’s
increments:

mm
wowt s- Aw. (1)
t=1
Later, we will consider more incremental cases in which w is updated after
each observation, and also less incremental cases in which it is updated only
after accumulating Au,’s over a training set consisting of several sequences.
The supervised-learning approach treats each sequence of observations and
its outcome as a sequence of observation-outcome pairs; that is, as the pairs
(21,2), (a2, 2),---,(@m,z). The increment due to time t depends on the error
between PF, and z, and on how changing w will affect P,. The prototypical
supervised-learning update procedure is

Aw, = a(z — Pi)VuFh, (2)

where a is a positive parameter affecting the rate of learning, and the gradient,
Vw, is the vector of partial derivatives of P, with respect to each component
of w.

For example, consider the special case in which P, is a linear function of 2;
and w, that is, in which P, = wl a, = 7, w(d)ae(t), where w(z) and 2;,(z) are
1The other cases can be reduced to this one by reorganizing the observations in such a

way that each x; includes some or all of the earlier observations. Cases in which predictions
should depend on t can also be reduced to this one by including t as a component of z:.

14 R. 8. SUTTON

the 78 components of w and 2, respectively.? In this case we have VP; = 22,
and (2) reduces to the well known Widrow-Hoff rule (Widrow & Hoff, 1960):

Aw; = a(z — w? ay) ae.

This linear learning method is also known as the “delta rule,” the ADALINE,
and the LMS filter. It is widely used in connectionism, pattern recognition,
signal processing, and adaptive control. The basic idea is that the difference
z—w? 2, represents the scalar error between the prediction, w?z;, and what
it should have been, z. This is multiplied by the observation vector x, to
determine the weight changes because z; indicates how changing each weight
will affect the error. For example, if the error is positive and 2;(7) is positive,
then w;(t) will be increased, increasing w?z, and reducing the error. The
Widrow-Hoff rule is simple, effective, and robust. Its theory is also better
developed than that of any other learning method (e.g., see Widrow & Stearns,
1985).

Another instance of the prototypical supervised-learning procedure is the
“generalized delta rule,” or backpropagation procedure, of Rumelhart et al.
(1985). In this case, P; is computed by a multi-layer connectionist. network
and is a nonlinear function of z; and w. Nevertheless, the update rule used
is still exactly (2), just as in the Widrow-Hoff rule, the only difference being
that a more complicated process is used to compute the gradient Vy F:.

In any case, note that all Aw; in (2) depend critically on z, and thus cannot
be determined until the end of the sequence when z becomes known. Thus,
all observations and predictions made during a sequence must be remembered
until its end, when all the Aw;’s are computed. In other words, (2) cannot be
computed incrementally.

There is, however, a TD procedure that produces exactly the same result
as (2), and yet which can be computed incrementally. The key is to represent
the error z — P, as a sum of changes in predictions, that is, as

m
z-Rh= So (Pett — Px) where P41 def
k=t

Using this, equations (1) and (2) can be combined as

Of

Ma:

w—wt+ > alz-P)VoPi = wt

t=1

(Proi - Pr)VuPs

Il
€
+
M> IM:

ay (Peoi — Pr)VuPs

>
i

Me
it
e

t
o(Pi41 — Pr) > Vw Pe:
1 k=1

Ms

= wt
t

2wT is the transpose of the column vector w. Unless otherwise noted, all vectors are
column vectors.

TEMPORAL-DIFFERENCE LEARNING 15

In other words, converting back to a rule to be used with (1):

t

k=1

Unlike (2), this equation can be computed incrementally, because each Au;
depends only on a pair of successive predictions and on the sum of all past
values for VP;. This saves substantially on memory, because it is no longer
necessary to individually remember al] past values of V, P;. Equation (3) also
makes much milder demands on the computational speed of the device that
implements it; although it requires slightly more arithmetic operations overall
(the additional ones are those needed to accumulate eet Vue), they can
be distributed over time more evenly. Whereas (3) computes one increment
to w on each time step, (2) must wait until a sequence is completed and then
compute all of the increments due to that sequence. If M is the maximum
possible length of a sequence, then under many circumstances (3) will require
only 1/Mth of the memory and speed required by (2).?

For reasons that will be made clear shortly, we refer to the procedure given
by (3) as the TD(1) procedure. In addition, we will refer to a procedure as
linear if its predictions P; are a linear function of the observation vectors z;
and the vector of memory parameters w, that is, if P, = w?x;. We have just
proven:

Theorem 1 On multi-step prediction problems, the linear TD(1) procedure
produces the same per-sequence weight changes as the Widrow-Hoff procedure.

Next, we introduce a family of TD procedures that produce weight changes
different from those of any supervised-learning procedure.

2.3 The TD()) family of learning procedures

The hallmark of temporal-difference methods is their sensitivity to changes
in successive predictions rather than to overall error between predictions and
the final outcome. In response to an increase (decrease) in prediction from P;
to Pr41, an increment Aw, is determined that increases (decreases) the pre-
dictions for some or all of the preceding observation vectors 21,...,2;. The
procedure given by (3) is the special case in which all of those predictions are
altered to an equal extent. In this article we also consider a class of TD proce-
dures that make greater alterations to more recent predictions. In particular,
we consider an exponential weighting with recency, in which alterations to the
predictions of observation vectors occurring k steps in the past are weighted
according to A* for0< A <1:

t
t—k
Aw, = a(Pit1 — Pr) $0 ARV Pe (4)
k=1
3Strictly speaking, there are other incremental aterenine for implementing the com-
3

bination of (1) and (2), but only the TD rule (3) is appropriate for updating w on a
per-observation basis.

16 R. 8. SUTTON

Note that for A = I this is equivalent to (3), the TD implementation of the pro-
totypical supervised-learning method. Accordingly, we call this new procedure
TD(A) and we will refer to the procedure given by (3) as TD(1).

Alterations of past predictions can be weighted in ways other than the ex-
ponential form given above, and this may be appropriate for particular appli-
cations. However, an important advantage to the exponential form is that it
can be computed incrementally. Given that e; is the value of the sum in (4)
for t, we can incrementally compute e;41, using only current information, as

t+1
» t+1-k

Ct4+1 = Att VoPr
k=1

t
= VuPiit >) Mt Pe
k=1
= VuwPr4i + ret.

For 4 < 1, TD{(A) produces weight changes different from those made by any
supervised-learning method. The difference is greatest in the case of TD(0)
(where A = 0), in which the weight increment is determined only by its effect
on the prediction associated with the most recent observation:

Aw, = a( Prt _ Pi)Vw Fh.

Note that this procedure is formally very similar to the prototypical supervised-
learning procedure (2). The two equations are identical except that the actual
outcome z in (2) is replaced by the next prediction Pi, in the equation above.
The two methods use the same learning mechanism, but with different errors.
Because of these relationships and TD(0)’s overall simplicity, it is an important
focus here.

3. Examples of faster learning with TD methods

In this section we begin to address the claim that TD methods make more
efficient use of their experience than do supervised-learning methods, that they
converge more rapidly and make more accurate predictions along the way. TD
methods have this advantage whenever the data sequences have a certain sta-
tistical structure that is ubiquitous in prediction problems. This structure
naturally arises whenever the data sequences are generated by a dynamical
system, that is, by a system that has a state which evolves and is partially re-
vealed over time. Almost any real system is a dynamical system, including the
weather, national economies, and chess games. In this section, we develop two
illustrative examples: a game-playing example to help develop intuitions, and
a random-walk example as a simple demonstration with experimental results.

3.1 A game-playing example

It seems counter-intuitive that TD methods might learn more efficiently than
supervised-learning methods. In learning to predict an outcome, how can one

TEMPORAL-DIFFERENCE LEARNING 17

Figure 1. A game-playing example showing the inefficiency of supervised-learning
methods. Each circle represents a position or class of positions from a two-
person board game. The “bad” position is known from long experience to
lead 90% of the time to a loss and only 10% of the time to a win. The first
game in which the “novel” position occurs evolves as shown by the dashed
arrows. What evaluation should the novel position receive as a result of
this experience? Whereas TD methods correctly conclude that it should
be considered another bad state, supervised-learning methods associate it
fully with winning, the only outcome that has followed it.

do better than by knowing and using the actual outcome as a performance
standard? How can using a biased and potentially inaccurate subsequent pre-
diction possibly be a better use of the experience? The following example is
meant to provide an intuitive understanding of how this is possible.

Suppose there is a game position that you have learned is bad for you, that
has resulted most of the time in a loss and only rarely in a win for your side. For
example, this position might be a backgammon race in which you are behind,
or a disadvantageous configuration of cards in blackjack. Figure 1 represents
a simple case of such a position as a single “bad” state that has led 90% of
the time to a loss and only 10% of the time to a win. Now suppose you play
a game that reaches a novel position (one that you have never seen before),
that then progresses to reach the bad state, and that finally ends nevertheless
in a victory for you. That is, over several moves it follows the path shown
by dashed lines in Figure 1. As a result of this experience, your opinion of
the bad state would presumably improve, but what of the novel state? What
value would you associate with ¢¢ as a result of this experience?

A supervised-learning method would form a pair from the novel state and
the win that followed it, and would conclude that the novel state is likely to
lead to a win. A TD method, on the other hand, would form a pair from
the novel state and the bad state that immediately followed it, and would
conclude that the novel state is also a bad one, that it is likely to lead to a

18 R. 8. SUTTON

Figure 2. A generator of bounded random walks. This Markov process generated the
data sequences in the example. All walks begin in state D. From states
B, C, D, E, and F, the walk has a 50% chance of moving either to the
right or to the left. If either edge state, A or G, is entered, then the walk
terminates.

loss. Assuming we have properly classified the “bad” state, the TD method’s
conclusion is the correct one; the novel state led to a position that you know
usually leads to defeat; what happened after that is irrelevant. Although both
methods should converge to the same evaluations with infinite experience, the
TD method learns a better evaluation from this limited experience.

The TD method’s prediction would also be better had the game been lost
after reaching the bad state, as is more likely. In this case, a supervised-
learning method would tend to associate the novel position fully with losing,
whereas a TD method would tend to associate it with the bad position’s 90%
chance of losing, again a presumably more accurate assessment. In either case,
by adjusting its evaluation of the novel state towards the bad state’s evaluation,
rather than towards the actual outcome, the TD method makes better use of
the experience. The bad state’s evaluation is a better performance standard
because it is uncorrupted by random factors that subsequently influence the
final outcome. It is by eliminating this source of noise that TD methods can
outperform supervised-learning procedures.

In this example, we have ignored the possibility that the bad state’s previ-
ously learned evaluation is in error. Such errors will inevitably exist and will
affect the efficiency of TD methods in ways that cannot easily be evaluated
in an example of this sort. The example does not prove TD methods will be
better on balance, but it does demonstrate that a subsequent prediction can
easily be a better performance standard than the actual outcome.

This game-playing example can also be used to show how TD methods can
fail. Suppose the bad state is usually followed by defeats except when it is
preceded by the novel state, in which case it always leads to a victory. In
this odd case, TD methods could not perform better and might perform worse
than supervised-learning methods. Although there are several techniques for
eliminating or minimizing this sort of problem, it remains a greater difficulty
for TD methods than it does for supervised-learning methods. TD methods
try to take advantage of the information provided by the temporal sequence
of states, whereas supervised-learning methods ignore it. It is possible for this
information to be misleading, but more often it should be helpful.

TEMPORAL-DIFFERENCE LEARNING i9

Finally, note that although this example involved learning an evaluation
function, nothing about it was specific to evaluation functions. The methods
can equally well be used to predict outcomes unrelated to the player’s goals,
such as the number of pieces left at the end of the game. If TD methods are
more efficient than supervised-learning methods in learning evaluation func-
tions, then they should also be more efficient in general prediction-learning
problems.

3.2 A random-walk example

The game-playing example is too complex to analyze in great detail. Pre-
vious experiments with TD methods have also used complex domains (e.g.,
Samuel, 1959; Sutton, 1984; Barto et al., 1983; Anderson, 1986, 1987). Which
aspects of these domains can be simplified or eliminated, and which aspects
are essential in order for TD methods to be effective? In this paper, we pro-
pose that the only required characteristic is that the system predicted be a
dynamical one, that it have a state which can be observed evolving over time.
If this is true, then TD methods should learn more efficiently than supervised-
learning methods even on very simple prediction problems, and this is what we
illustrate in this subsection. Our example is one of the simplest of dynamical
systems, that which generates bounded random walks.

A bounded random walk is a state sequence generated by taking random
steps to the right or to the left until a boundary is reached. Figure 2 shows a
system that generates such state sequences. Every walk begins in the center
state D, At each step the walk moves to a neighboring state, either to the right
or to the left with equal probability. If either edge state (A or G) is entered,
the walk terminates. A typical walk might be DCDEFG. Suppose we wish
to estimate the probabilities of a walk ending in the rightmost state, G, given
that it is in each of the other states.

We applied linear supervised-learning and TD methods to this problem in
a straightforward way. A walk’s outcome was defined to be z = 0 for a walk
ending on the left at A and z = 1 for a walk ending on the right at G.
The learning methods estimated the expected value of z; for this choice of
z, its expected value is equal to the probability of a right-side termination.
For each nonterminal state 1, there was a corresponding observation vector
x,; if the walk was in state 7 at time ¢ then z, = x,;. Thus, if the walk
DCDEFG occurred, then the learning procedure would be given the sequence
Xp,Xo,Xp,Xe,xXFr,1. The vectors {x;} were the unit basis vectors of length
5, that is, four of their components were 0 and the fifth was 1 (e.g., xp =
(0,0, 1,0,0)7), with the one appearing at a different component for each state.
Thus, if the state the walk was in at time ¢ has its 1 at the 7** component
of its observation vector, then the prediction P, = w? 2; was simply the value
of the 7*® component of w. We use this particularly simple case to make this
example as clear as possible. The theorems we prove later for a more general
class of dynamical systems require only that the set. of observation vectors {x;}
be linearly independent.

Two computational experiments were performed using observation-outcome
sequences generated as described above. In order to obtain statistically reliable

20 R. 8. SUTTON

ERROR
USING
BEST a .
20 Widrow-Hoff

18
16
14
12

10

0.0 02 04 0.6 0.8 1.0
A

Figure 3. Average error on the random-walk problem under repeated presentations.
All data are from TD(A) with different values of 4. The dependent measure
used is the RMS error between the ideal predictions and those found by the
learning procedure after being repeatedly presented with the training set
until convergence of the weight vector. This measure was averaged over
100 training sets to produce the data shown. The 4 = 1 data point is
the performance level attained by the Widrow-Hoff procedure. For each
data point, the standard error is approximately ¢ = 0.01, so the differences
between the Widrow-Hoff procedure and the other procedures are highly
significant.

results, 100 training sets, each consisting of 10 sequences, were constructed for
use by all learning procedures. For all procedures, weight increments were
computed according to TD(A), as given by (4). Seven different values were
used for A. These were A = 1, resulting in the Widrow-Hoff supervised-learning
procedure, A = 0, resulting in linear TD(0), and also 4 = 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, and
0.9, resulting in a range of intermediate TD procedures.

In the first experiment, the weight vector was not updated after each se-
quence as indicated by (1). Instead, the Aw’s were accumulated over sequences
and only used to update the weight vector after the complete presentation of
a training set. Each training set was presented repeatedly to each learning
procedure until the procedure no longer produced any significant changes in
the weight vector. For small a, the weight vector always converged in this way,
and always to the same final value, independent of its initial value. We call
this the repeated presentations training paradigm.

The true probabilities of right-side termination — the ideal predictions — for
each of the nonterminal states can be computed as described in section 4.1.

These are 3, 3, 3, 3 and 3 for states B, C, D, E and F, respectively. As

TEMPORAL-DIFFERENCE LEARNING 21

A = 1 (Widrow-Hoff)

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
a

Figure 4. Average error on random walk problem after experiencing 10 sequences.
All data are from TD(A) with different values of a and 4. The dependent
measure is the RMS error between the ideal predictions and those found
by the learning procedure after a single presentation of a training set.
This measure was averaged over 100 training sets. The \ = 1 data points
represent performances of the Widrow-Hoff supervised-learning procedure.

a measure of the performance of a learning procedure on a training set, we
used the root mean squared (RMS) error between the procedure’s asymptotic
predictions using that training set and the ideal predictions. Averaging over
training sets, we found that performance improved rapidly as A was reduced
below 1 (the supervised-learning method) and was best at A = 0 (the extreme
TD method), as shown in Figure 3.

This result contradicts conventional wisdom. It is well known that, under
repeated presentations, the Widrow-Hoff procedure minimizes the RMS error
between its predictions and the actual outcomes in the training set (Widrow &
Stearns, 1985). How can it be that this optimal method performed worse than
all the TD methods for \ < 1? The answer is that the Widrow-Hoff procedure
only minimizes error on the training set; it does not necessarily minimize error
for future experience. In the following section, we prove that in fact it is linear
TD(0) that converges to what can be considered the optimal estimates for
matching future experience — those consistent with the maximum-likelihood
estimate of the underlying Markov process.

The second experiment concerns the question of learning rate when the
training set is presented just once rather than repeatedly until convergence.
Although it is difficult to prove a theorem concerning learning rate, it is easy to
perform the relevant computational experiment. We presented the same data
to the learning procedures, again for several values of A, with the following

22 R. 8. SUTTON

ERROR
USING
BEST @ .
20 Widrow-Hoff

18
.16
.14
12

.10

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
x

Figure 5. Average error at best a value on random-walk problem. Each data point
represents the average over 100 training sets of the error in the estimates
found by TD(A), for particular 4 and a values, after a single presentation
of a training set. The A value is given by the horizontal coordinate. The a
value was selected from those shown in Figure 4 to yield the lowest error
for that » value.

procedural changes. First, each training set was presented once to each pro-
cedure. Second, weight updates were performed after each sequence, as in (1),
rather than after each complete training set. Third, each learning procedure
was applied with a range of values for the learning-rate parameter a. Fourth,
so that there was no bias either toward right-side or left-side terminations, all
components of the weight vector were initially set to 0.5.

The results for several representative values of A are shown in Figure 4.
Not surprisingly, the value of a had a significant effect on performance, with
best results obtained with intermediate values. For all values, however, the
Widrow-Hoff procedure, TD(1), produced the worst estimates. All of the TD
methods with A < 1 performed better both in absolute terms and over a wider
range of a values than did the supervised-learning method.

Figure 5 plots the best error level achieved for each A value, that is, using
the a value that was best for that ’ value. As in the repeated-presentation
experiment, all A values less than 1 were superior to the \ = 1 case. However,
in this experiment the best A value was not 0, but somewhere near 0.3.

One reason 4 = 0 is not optimal for this problem is that TD(0) is relatively
slow at propagating prediction levels back along a sequence. For example,
suppose states D, E, and F all start with the prediction value 0.5, and the
sequence Xp,Xx,XF,1 is experienced. TD(0) will change only F’s prediction,
whereas the other procedures will also change E’s and D’s to decreasing ex-

TEMPORAL-DIFFERENCE LEARNING 23

tents. If the sequence is repeatedly presented, this is no handicap, as the
change works back an additional step with each presentation, but for a single
presentation it means slower learning.

This handicap could be avoided by working backwards through the se-
quences. For example, for the sequence xp, Xz, Xr, |, first F’s prediction could
be updated in light of the 1, then /’s prediction could be updated toward F’s
new level, and so on. In this way the effect of the 1 could be propagated
back to the beginning of the sequence with only a single presentation. The
drawback to this technique is that it loses the implementation advantages of
TD methods. Since it changes the last prediction in a sequence first, it has
no incremental implementation. However, when this is not an issue, such as
when learning is done offline from an existing database, working backward in
this way should produce the best predictions.

4. Theory of temporal-difference methods

In this section, we provide a theoretical foundation for temporal-difference
methods. Such a foundation is particularly needed for these methods because
most of their learning is done on the basis of previously learned quantities.
“Bootstrapping” in this way may be what makes TD methods efficient, but
it can also make them difficult to analyze and to have confidence in. In fact,
hitherto no TD method has ever been proved stable or convergent to the
correct predictions.4 The theory developed here concerns the linear TD(0)
procedure and a class of tasks typified by the random walk example discussed
in the preceding section. Two major results are presented: (1) an asymptotic
convergence theorem for linear TD(0) when presented with new data sequences;
and (2) a theorem that linear TD(0) converges under repeated presentations
to the optimal (maximum likelihood) estimates. Finally, we discuss how TD
methods can be viewed as gradient-descent procedures.

4.1 Convergence of linear TD(0)

The theory presented here is for data sequences generated by absorbing
Markov processes such as the random-walk process discussed in the preced-
ing section. Such processes, in which each next state depends only on the
current state, are among the formally simplest dynamical systems. They are
defined by a set of terminal states T, a set of nonterminal states N, and a set
of transition probabilities pj; (¢ € N, 7 € NUT), where each p,; is the proba-
bility of a transition from state 7 to state j, given that the process is in state 7.
The “absorbing” property means that indefinite cycles among the nontermi-
nal states are not possible; all sequences {except for a set of zero probability)
eventually terminate.

Given an initial state g,;, an absorbing Markov process provides a way of
generating a state sequence 91, 42,--.-,9m+4i, where Qm41 € T. We will assume
the initial state is chosen probabilistically from among the nonterminal states,

4Witten (1977) presented a sketch of a convergence proof for a TD procedure that pre-
dicted discounted costs in a Markov decision problem, but many steps were left out, and it
now appears that the theorem he proposed is not true.

24 R. 8. SUTTON

each with probability u;. As in the random walk example, we do not give the
learning algorithms direct knowledge of the state sequence, but only of a related
observation-outcome sequence 21,22,...,2m,z- Each numerical observation
vector z; is chosen dependent only on the corresponding nonterminal state
g, and the scalar outcome z is chosen dependent only on the terminal state
4m+1- In what follows, we assume that there is a specific observation vector x;
corresponding to each nonterminal state 2 such that if g¢, = 7, then z; = x,. For
each nonterminal state 7, we assume outcomes z are selected from an arbitrary
probability distribution with expected value Z,.

The first step toward a formal understanding of any learning procedure is to
prove that it converges asymptotically to the correct behavior with experience.
The desired behavior in this case is to map each nonterminal state’s observation
vector x; to the true expected value of the outcome z given that the state
sequence is starting in 7. That is, we want the predictions P(x;,w) to equal
E{z|i}, Vi € N. Let us call these the ideal predictions. Given complete
knowledge of the Markov process, they can be computed as follows:

E{z|t}= So pig2 + > Dig > Dyke + S- Dig > Dyk >, Patz +o:

JET JEN keT JEN kEN leT

For any matrix M, let [M];; denote its 7j** component, and, for any vector
v, let [v]; denote its zt component. Let Q@ denote the matrix with entries
[Qliz = piz for 7,7 € N, and let hk denote the vector with components [hk]; =

jer Pij2j for 1 € N. Then we can write the above equation as

oo
E{z|i}= pea = [(f-@)*A],. (5)
k=0 Fi
The second equality and the existence of the limit and the inverse are assured
by Theorem A.1.° This theorem can be applied here because the elements of
Q* are the probabilities of going from one nonterminal state to another in k
steps; for an absorbing Markov process, these probabilities must all converge
to 0 as k — oo.

If the set of observation vectors { x; | 7 © N } is lmearly independent, and if
a is chosen small enough, then it is known that the predictions of the Widrow-
Hoff rule converge in expected value to the ideal predictions (e.g., see Widrow
& Stearns, 1985). We now prove the same result for linear TD(0):

Theorem 2 For any absorbing Markov chain, for any distribution of starting
probabilities u,, for any outcome distributions with finite expected values Z,,
and for any linearly independent set of observation vectors {x; | 7 € ny
there exists ane > O such that, for all positive a < € and for any initial
weight vector, the predictions of linear TD(@) (with weight updates after each
sequence) converge in expected value to the ideal predictions (5). That is, if

5To simplify presentation of the proofs, some of the more straightforward but potentially
distracting steps have been placed in the Appendix as separate theorems. These are referred
to in the text as Theorems A.1, A.2, and A.3.

TEMPORAL-DIFFERENCE LEARNING 25

Wy, denotes the weight vector after n sequences have been experienced, then
limpoo E {xP wn} = E {z |i} =((-Q)-*hhi, VIE N.

PROOF: Linear TD(0) updates w, after each sequence as follows, where m
denotes the number of observation vectors in the sequence:

™m
Wn + So af Peps —Pi)VwP: where Pai fz

t=1
m1
= wnt > alPe1 — Pi) VuP + a(2 — Pm)VwPm
t=1
m—-1
= Wn + > a(wAXaer1 ~ Wn Xr )Xae + oz ~ WA Xam )Xam
t=]

Wn+1

where Xq, is the observation vector corresponding to the state q, entered at time
t within the sequence. This equation groups the weight increments according
to their time of occurrence within the sequence. Each increment corresponds to
a particular state transition, and so we can alternatively group them according
to the source and destination states of the transitions:

Wn4t1 = Wy + > > niga (wax; — whxi) xi + s- > niga (2 — wei) x,
i€N JEN tEN JET
where 7,;; denotes the number of times the transition ¢ — 7 occurs in the

sequence. (For 7 € T, all but one of the 4,; is 0.)

Since the random processes generating state transitions and outcomes are
independent of each other, we can take the expected value of each term above,
yielding

E{wni1| wn} = Wn + > > dipi;a (wax; — we xi) x; (6)
iEN JEN
+ > > dpizce (2; — wy Xi) Xi,
i€N JET

where d; is the expected number of times the Markov chain is in state 7 in one
sequence, so that d;p;; is the expected value of n,;;. For an absorbing Markov
chain (e.g., see Kemeny & Snell, 1976, p. 46):

d= pF (I -Q)y},7 (7)
where {d]; = d,; and [yu]; = wi, 7 € N. Each d; is strictly positive, because any
state for which d; = 0 has no probability of being visited and can be discarded.

Let w, denote the expected value of w,. Then, since the dependence of
E {wri1 | wn} on wy is linear, we can write

5 _T _T 5._ af
Dnt1 = tnt). >~ dipiga (w2x; — WF xi) xi+ > SO dipiger (2; — WE i) Xi,
iEN JEN iEN jeT

26 R. 8. SUTTON

an iterative update formula in w, that depends only on initial conditions.
Now we rearrange terms and convert to matrix and vector notation, letting D
denote the diagonal matrix with diagonal entries [D],; = d; and X denote the
matrix with columns x;:

@nt1 = Wnta > dx (= Pig%y + > pig Be x; _ wrx; > n|

iEN j€T gEN jJENUT

ieN jEN

Wn +a > djx; (1 + > Dijon x; _ sts

tin t aXD (h+ QXT Gn — XT Gn);

Xing. = XT Wy +aXT XD (ht QX wy, — X Wy)

aX? XDh + (I — aX? XD(I — Q))XT Gn

= aXT™XDh+ (I - aX XD(I—Q))aX™XDh
+ (I -aXTXD(I — Q))?XT Gn-1

n~-1

= S°(l-aX?XD(I ~Q))*aX?XDh
k=0

+ (I —aXTXD(I — Q))?XT wo.

Assuming for the moment that limn—oo(I — aX? X D(I — Q))" = 0, then, by
theorem A.1, the sequence {X7w,} converges to

lim X7@, = (I-(I—-aX?XD(I-Q))) oX™XDh

(l-—Q)-?D-'( XT X)a7 aX? X Dh
(I- Q)7*h;

. T _ _ —~1 :
tim E {xs Wn} = [(7-Q)7h], WEN,

which is the desired result. Note that D~! must exist because D is diagonal
with all positive diagonal entries, and (X7 X)—1 must exist by Theorem A.2.

It thus remains to show that limp.9([-aX? X D(I-Q))" = 0. We do this
by first showing that D(J—Q) is positive definite, and then that X7 X D(I-Q)
has a full set of eigenvalues all of whose real parts are positive. This will enable
us to show that a can be chosen such that all eigenvalues of ]~aX7? X D(I-Q)
are less than 1 in modulus, which assures us that its powers converge.

TEMPORAL-DIFFERENCE LEARNING 27

We show that D(J —Q) is positive definite® by applying the following lemma
(see Varga, 1962, p. 23, for a proof}:

Lemma If A is a real, symmetric, and strictly diagonally dominant matriz
with positive diagonal entries, then A 1s positive definite.

We cannot apply this lemma directly to DU — Q) because it is not symmetric.
However, by Theorem A.3, any matrix A is positive definite exactly when the
symmetric matrix A+ A? is positive definite, so we can prove that D(I — Q)
is positive definite by applying the lemma to S = D(I- Q)+(D(I-Q))?. 8
is clearly real and symmetric; it remains to show that it has positive diagonal
entries and is strictly diagonally dominant.

First, we note that

[DUE - Q)hiz = S [Dell — Qleg = [Dsl — Qlig = dal — Qliy.
k

We will use this fact several times in the following.

S’s diagonal entries are positive, because [S],; = [D(J — Q)]« + [(DU —-
Q))T |e = 2[DU — Q)]is = 2ds[I — Qlis = 2d;(1 — pix) > 0,2 € N. Furthermore,
S’s off-diagonal entries are nonpositive, because, for 1 # j, [S]i; = [DUI —-
QDliz + (DU - Q))* hig = lI — Qlig + 43 — Qe = —deviy — dpi < 0.

S is strictly diagonally dominant if and only if |[S]i| > 30,.; [[S]isl, for all
7, with strict inequality holding for at least one 7. However, since [S];; > 0 and
[S]i; < 0, we need only show that [S]i > —30,4;[S]i;, in other words, that

> j [S]i; > 0, which can be directly shown:

dlShs

Y= (ID = Q)lis + (DU - Q))7 hs)

3
> all — Ois + Yo ay — Qs
j j

d; ee ~ Qhiy + [a7 (2 - Qi:

d;(1— Ps) + [uP (F-Q) 1 -Q)] by (7)

j
di(1 — $7 paz) + oi
3
> 0.
Furthermore, strict inequality must hold for at least one 7, because yz; must be

strictly positive for at least. one 7. Therefore, S is strictly diagonally dominant
and the lemma applies, proving that S and D(J —Q) are both positive definite.

6A matrix A is positive definite if and only if y7 Ay > 0 for all real vectors y # 0.

28 R. 8. SUTTON

Next we show that X7 X D(I — Q) has a full set of eigenvalues all of whose
real parts are positive. First of all, the set of eigenvalues is clearly full, because
the matrix is nonsingular, being the product of three matrices, X7X, D, and
I —Q, that we have already established as nonsingular. Let \ and y be any
eigenvalue-eigenvector pair. Let y = a+ bi and z = (X7X)—!y € 0 (ie,

= X?Xz). Then

y" DU — Q)y = 2" XT XDI — Q)y = 2* hy = Az" XT Xz = Xz)" Xz,

yy

where “*” denotes the conjugate-transpose. This implies that
Re (yDU - Q)y) = Re ((X2)'xX2);

a? D(I — Q)a + 67 DUI — Q)b = (Xz)*Xz Red.

Since the left side and (Xz)*Xz must both be strictly positive, so must the
real part of A.

Furthermore, y must also be an eigenvector of I! — aX? X D(I — Q), because
(I — aX? XD(I — Q))y = y — adAy = (1 — a@A)y. Thus, all eigenvectors of
I —aXT XD(I ~ Q) are of the form 1 — ad, where X has positive real part.
For each 4 = a+ bt, a > 0, if a is chosen 0< a < meee then 1— «a, will have
modulus’ less than one:

ll-aAl = _V(1 — aa)? + (—ab)?

= V1—2aa+ 07a? + 076?

= 1 — 2aa + a*(a? + 6?)

2a
< 1 — 20a + a3 (a? + 6?) = V1 - 20a 4+ 2aa = 1.

ae

The criterial value wear will be different for different 4; choose € to be the
smallest such value. Then, for any positive a < ¢, all eigenvalues 1 — aA
of I — aX D(I — Q)X7 are less than one in modulus. And this immediately
implies (e.g., see Varga, 1962, p. 13) that lim,_...(J —aX D(I-Q)XT)” =
completing the proof.

We have just shown that the expected values of the predictions found by
linear TD(0) converge to the ideal predictions for data sequences generated
by absorbing Markov processes. Of course, just as with the Widrow-Hoff
procedure, the predictions themselves do not converge; they continue to vary
around their expected values according to their most recent experience. In the
case of the Widrow-Hoff procedure, it is known that the asymptotic variance
of the predictions is finite and can be made arbitrarily small by the choice
of the learning-rate parameter a. Furthermore, if a is reduced according to
an appropriate schedule, e.g., a = i, then the variance converges to zero as

7The modulus of a complex number a+ bi is /a? +8".

TEMPORAL-DIFFERENCE LEARNING 29

well. We conjecture that these stronger forms of convergence hold for linear
TD(0) as well, but this remains an open question. Also open is the question of
convergence of linear TD(A) for 0 < A < 1. We now know that both TD(0) and
TD(1) - the Widrow-Hoff rule — converge in the mean to the ideal predictions;
we conjecture that the intermediate TD(A) procedures do as well.

4.2 Optimality and learning rate

The result obtained in the previous subsection assures us that both TD
methods and supervised learning methods converge asymptotically to the ideal
estimates for data sequences generated by absorbing Markov processes. How-
ever, if both kinds of procedures converge to the same result, which gets there
faster? In other words, which kind of procedure makes the better predictions
from a finite rather than an infinite amount of experience? Despite the pre-
viously noted empirical results showing faster learning with TD methods, this
has not been proved for any general case. In this subsection we present a
related formal result that helps explain the empirical result of faster learning
with TD methods. We show that the predictions of linear TD(0) are optimal
in an important sense for repeatedly presented finite training sets.

In the following, we first define what we mean by optimal predictions for
finite training sets. Though optimal, these predictions are extremely expensive
to compute, and neither TD nor supervised-learning methods compute them
directly. However, TD methods do have a special relationship with them.
One common training process is to present a finite amount of data over and
over again until the learning process converges (e.g., see Ackley, Hinton, &
Sejnowski, 1985; Rumelhart, Hinton, & Williams, 1985). We prove that lin-
ear TD(Q) converges under this repeated presentations training paradigm to
the optimal] predictions, while supervised-learning procedures converge to sub-
optimal predictions. This result also helps explain TD methods’ empirically
faster learning rates. Since they are stepping toward a better final result, it
makes sense that they would also be better after the first step.

The word optimal can be misleading because it suggests a universally agreed
upon criterion for the best. way of doing something. In fact, there are many
kinds of optimality, and choosing among them is often a critical decision.
Suppose that one observes a training set consisting of a finite number of
observation-outcome sequences, and that one knows the sequences to be gen-
erated by an absorbing Markov process as described in the previous section.
What might one mean by the “best” predictions given such a training set?

If the a prior? distribution of possible Markov processes is known, then
the predictions that are optimal in the mean square sense can be calculated
through Bayes’s rule. Unfortunately, it is very difficult to justify any a priori
assumptions about possible Markov processes. In order to avoid making any
such assumptions, mathematicians have developed another kind of optimal
estimate, known as the maximum-likelithood estimate. This is the kind of
optimality with which we will be concerned. For example, suppose one flips
a coin ten times and gets seven heads. What is the best estimate of the
probability of getting a head on the next toss? In one sense, the best estimate
depends entirely on a prior: assumptions about how likely one is to run into fair

30 R. 8. SUTTON

and biased coins, and thus cannot be uniquely determined. On the other hand,
the best answer in the maximum-likelihood sense requires no such assumptions;
it is simply i. In general, the maximum-likelihood estimate of the process
that produced. a set of data is that process whose probability of producing the

data is the largest.

What is the maximum-likelihood estimate for our prediction problem? If the
observation vectors x; for each nonterminal state 7 are distinct, then one can
enumerate the nonterminal states appearing in the training set and effectively
know which state the process is in at each time. Since terminal states do not
produce observation vectors, but only outcomes, it is not possible to tell when
two sequences end in the same terminal state; thus we will assume that all
sequences terminate in different states.®

Let T and N denote the sets of terminal and nonterminal states, respectively,
as observed in the training set. Let [Qi = piz (1,7 € N) be the fraction of
the times that state 7 was entered in which a transition occurred to state
j. Let z; be the outcome of the sequence in which termination occurred at
state j € T, and let (Al; = jek Big2y, + € N. Q and h are the maximum-
likelihood estimates of the true process parameters Q and h. Finally, estimate
the expected value of the outcome z, given that the process is in state 7 € N,

as 60)
[Seo%4] = [c- Or, ()
k=0

. 2
4

That is, choose the estimate that would be ideal if in fact the maximum-
likelihood estimate of the underlying process were exactly correct. Let us
call these estimates the optimal predictions. Note that even though Q is an
estimated quantity, it still corresponds to some absorbing Markov chain. Thus,
limy+oo Q”" = 0 and Theorem A.1 applies, assuring the existence of the limit
and inverse in the above equation.

Although the procedure outlined above serves well as a definition of optimal
performance, note that it itself would be impractical to implement. First
of all, it relies heavily on the observation vectors x; being distinct, and on
the assumption that they map one-to-one onto states. Second, the procedure
involves keeping statistics on each pair of states (e.g., the p,;) rather than
on each state or component of the observation vector. If n is the number of
states, then this procedure requires O(n?) memory whereas the other learning
procedures require only O(n) memory. In addition, the right side of (8) must
be re-computed each time additional data become available and new estimates
are needed. This procedure may require as much as O(n?) computation per
time step as compared to O(n) for the supervised-learning and TD methods.

Consider the case in which the observation vectors are linearly independent,
the training set is repeatedly presented, and the weights are updated after
each complete presentation of the training set. In this case, the Widrow-Hoff

5 Alternatively, we may assume that there is only one terminal state and that the distri-
bution of a sequence’s outcome depends on its penultimate state. This does not change any
of the conclusions of the analysis.

TEMPORAL-DIFFERENCE LEARNING 31

procedure converges so as to minimize the root mean squared error between
its predictions and the actual outcomes in the training set. (Widrow & Stearns,
1985). As illustrated earlier in the random-walk example, linear TD(0) con-
verges to a different set of predictions. We now show that those predictions
are in fact the optimal predictions in the maximum-likelihood sense discussed
above. That is, we prove the following theorem:

Theorem 3 For any training set whose observation vectors {x; |i € N}
are linearly independent, there exists an € > 0 such that, for all positive a < €
and for any initial weight vector, the predictions of linear TD(0) converge,
under repeated presentations of the training set with weight updates after each
complete presentation, to the optimal predictions (8). That ts, if wy is the
value of the weight vector after the training set has been presented n times,

then limp oo XP Wn = [(I — Q)~ 1h] ;, WEN.

PROOF: The proof of Theorem 3 is almost the same as that of Theorem 2,
so here we only highlight the differences. Linear TD(0) updates w,, after each
presentation of the training set:

Ms
Wn+1 = Wn + > > of Pry — Pe)yVuPe;
8s t=1
where m, is the number of observation vectors in the s*® sequence in the
training set, P? is the * prediction in the s*” sequence, and P,_,; is defined
to be the outcome of the s*® sequence. Let mij be the number of times the
transition 7 — 7 appears in the training set; then the sums can be regrouped
as

Wnt =Un+ >, >. niyo (wax; — we Xi )xet+ So YS nye (z aj — Ww. a Xi) Xi

iEeN JEN iEN jet
= wnt >> > dipizer( Wy AX — Wp xy )xi+ 5° So dipize (z zy — Ww. Axi) Xi
iEN GEN icN jeF

where d; is the number of times state i © N appears in the training set.
The rest of the proof for Theorem 2, starting at (6), carries through with
estimates substituting for actual values throughout. The only step in the
proof that requires additional support is to show that (7) still holds, i.e., that
d? = pT(I — Q)~', where [fi]; is the number of sequences in the training set
that begin in state 7 € N. Note that Dien Mii = Liew d;p;; is the number
of times state 7 appears in the training set as the destination of a transition.
Since all occurrences of state 7 must be either as the destination of a transition
or as the beginning state of a sequence, d; = (fl, +05; d;p;;. Converting this to
matrix notation, we have d? = aT + d?Q, which yields the desired conclusion,
d? = pT (I ~ Q)7!, after algebraic manipulations. |]

We have just shown that if linear TD(Q) is repeatedly presented with a
finite training set, then it converges to the optimal estimates. The Widrow-
Hoff rule, on the other hand, converges to the estimates that minimize error on

32 R. 8. SUTTON

the training set; as we saw in the random-walk example, these are in general
different from the optimal estimates. That TD(0) converges to a better set of
estimates with repeated presentations helps explain how and why it could learn
better estimates from a single presentation, but it does not prove that. What
is still needed is a characterization of the learning rate of TD methods that can
be compared with those already available for supervised-learning methods.

4.3 Temporal-difference methods as gradient descent

Like many other statistical learning methods, TD methods can be viewed
as gradient descent (hill climbing) in the space of the modifiable parameters
(weights). That is, their goal can be viewed as minimizing an overall error
measure J(w) over the space of weights by repeatedly incrementing the weight
vector in (an approximation to) the direction in which J(w) decreases most
steeply. Denoting the approximation to this direction of steepest descent, or

gradient, as V.,J7(w), such methods are typically written as
Aw, = —aV wJ (wr);

where o@ is a positive constant determining step size.

For a multi-step prediction problem in which P,; = P(2;,w) is meant to
approximate £ {z|2,}, a natural error measure is the expected value of the
square of the difference between these two quantities:

J(u) = Ex { (Bex) - Pou)’ }.

where Ex{ } denotes the expectation operator over observation vectors x.
J(w) measures the error for a weight vector averaged over all observation
vectors, but at each time step one usually obtains additional information about
only a single observation vector. The usual next step, therefore, is to define a
per-observation error measure @(w,x) with the property that Ex{Q(w,x)} =
J(w). For a multi-step prediction problem,

Q(w,x) = (z {z|x}— P(x, w))

Each time step’s weight increments are then determined using V,,Q(w, 2),
relying on the fact that Ex{VwQ(w,x)} = VyJ(w), so that the overall effect
of the equation for Au, given above can be approximated over many steps
using small a by

Aw, = —aVyQ(w, 21)
20 (Et | 24} — P(a1,v)) Vu P(ae, 0).

The quantity EF {z | 2} is not directly known and must be estimated. De-
pending on how this is done, one gets either a supervised-learning method or
a TD method. If F {z | 2:} is approximated by z, the outcome that actually

TEMPORAL-DIFFERENCE LEARNING 33

occurs following z;, then we get the classical supervised-learning procedure
(2). Alternatively, if & {z|2,} is approximated by P(z:41,w), the immedi-
ately following prediction, then we get the extreme TD method, TD(0). Key
to this analysis is the recognition, in the definition of J(w), that our real goal
is for each prediction to match the expected value of the subsequent outcome,
not the actual outcome occurring in the training set. TD methods can per-
form better than supervised-learning methods because the actual outcome of
a sequence is often not the best estimate of its expected value.

5. Generalizations of TD(A)

In this article, we have chosen to analyze particularly simple cases of tem-
poral-difference methods. This has clarified their operation and made it pos-
sible to prove theorems. However, more realistic problems may require more
complex TD metheds. In this section, we briefly explore some ways in which
the simple methods can be extended. Except where explicitly noted, the the-
orems presented earlier do not strictly apply to these extensions.

5.1 Predicting cumulative outcomes

Temporal-difference methods are not limited to predicting only the final out-
come of a sequence; they can also be used to predict a quantity that accumu-
lates over a sequence. That is, each step of a sequence may incur a cost, where
we wish to predict the expected total cost over the sequence. A common way
for this to arise is for the costs to be elapsed time. For example, in a bounded
random walk one might want to predict how many steps will be taken before
termination. In a pole-balancing problem one may want to predict time until
a failure in balancing, and in a packet-switched telecommunications network
one may want to predict the total delay in sending a packet. In game playing,
points may be lost or won throughout a game, and we may be interested in
predicting the expected net gain or loss. In all of these examples, the quantity
predicted is the cumulative sum of a number of parts, where the parts become
known as the sequence evolves. For convenience, we will continue to refer to
these parts as costs, even though their minimization will not be a goal in all
applications.

In such problems, it is natural to use the observation vector received at
each step to predict the total cumulative cost after that step, rather than the
total cost for the sequence as a whole. Thus, we will want P; to predict the
remaining cumulative cost given the ¢‘® observation rather than the overall
cost for the sequence. Since the cost for the preceding portion of the sequence
is already known, the total sequence cost can always be estimated as the sum of
the known cost-so-far and the estimated cost-remaining (cf. the A* algorithm,
dynamic programming).

The procedures presented earlier are easily generalized to include the case
of predicting cumulative outcomes. Let c;4, denote the actual cost incurred
between times ¢ and ¢+ 1, and let ¢,; denote the expected value of the cost
incurred on transition from state 7 to state 7. We would like PF, to equal
the expected value of z = het Ce+1, where m is the number of observation

34 R. S. SUTTON

vectors in the sequence. The prediction error can be represented in terms of
temporal differences as 2, — P; = vp Ch4-1 — Pt = per (cee + Praia — Pr);
where we define P,,,4.; = 0. Then, following the same steps used to derive the
TD(A) family of procedures defined by (4), one can also derive the cumulative
TD(A) family defined by

t
Aw, = a(cry1 + Piss — Py) D0 MV Pe
k=1

The three theorems presented earlier in this article carry over to the cumu-
lative outcome case with the obvious modifications. For example, the ideal
prediction for each state 1 € N is the expected value of the cumulative sum of

the costs:
Ef{z|ae=x} = So) pigtig + Do pig Do pyntye
j€NUT jEN kENUT

+ > pig SO pit > PriCki +:

JEN KEN l1ENUT

If we let A be the vector with components [h]; = Dy Dijliz, 1 € N, then (5)
holds for this case as well. Following steps similar to those in the proof of
Theorem 2, one can show that, using linear cumulative TD(0), the expected
value of the weight vector after 7 sequences have been experienced is

- _ = at _T
Dnt. = n+ >) S> dipiyar (Gi + Wax; — WAX) Xi
iEN JEN
= pt
+ s> S- dipig ot (Cig — DW, Xi) X
1EN GET
~ ota ax; bs + Vo pw x, — atx, _
= in ees Dig ag DigWy Xp Wy, Xi Pig
iEN jENUT JEN j€NUT

= Wnta s djx; [Als + S ize x; - we x; ;
1EN JEN

after which the rest of the proof of Theorem 2 follows unchanged.

5.2 Intra-sequence weight updating

So far we have concentrated on TD procedures in which the weight vector
is updated after the presentation of a complete sequence or training set. Since
each observation of a sequence generates an increment to the weight vector, in
many respects it would be simpler to update the weight vector immediately af-
ter each observation. In fact, all previously studied TD methods have operated
in this more fully incremental way.

TEMPORAL-DIFFERENCE LEARNING 35

Extending TD(A) to allow for intra-sequence updating requires a bit of care.
The obvious extension is

t
Wey1 = W; + O(Pi41 — Py) Ss; MVP, where P, P(2,, wi-1).
k=1

However, if w is changed within a sequence, then the temporal changes in
prediction during the sequence, as defined by this procedure, will be due to
changes in w as well as to changes in x. This is probably an undesirable
feature; in extreme cages it may even lead to instability. The following update
rule ensures that only changes in prediction due to z are effective in causing
weight alterations:

t

west = we + a(Pleegr,w) — P(e, we) Yo AV P(e, we):
k=1

This refinement is used in Samuel’s (1959) checker player and in Sutton’s
(1984) Adaptive Heuristic Critic, but not in Holland’s (1986) bucket brigade
or in the system described by Barto et al. (1983).

5.3 Prediction by a fixed interval

Finally, consider the problem of making a prediction for a particular fixed
amount of time later. For exampie, suppose you are interested in predicting
one week in advance whether or not it will rain — on each Monday, you predict
whether it will rain on the following Monday, on each Tuesday, you predict
whether it will rain on the following Tuesday, and so on for each day of the
week. Although this problem involves a sequence of predictions, TD methods
cannot be directly applied because each prediction is of a different event and
thus there is no clear desired relationship between them.

In order to apply TD methods, this problem must be embedded within a
larger family of prediction problems. At each day t, we must form not only
P/, our estimate of the probability of rain seven days later, but also P®, P?,
..., P}, where each P? is an estimate of the probability of rain 6 days later.
This will provide for overlapping sequences of inter-related predictions, e.g.,
PY, P81, PP.o,++-s Pig, all of the same event, in this case of whether it will
rain on day t +7. If the predictions are accurate, we will have PS = Pee i
Vt, 1 <6 <7, where Pp is defined as the actual outcome at time ¢ (e.g., 1 if it
rains, 0 if it does not rain). The update rule for the weight vector w® used to
compute Pé would be

t
Aw? = o( PP! — PP) > EV Pe.
k=1

As illustrated here, there are three key steps in constructing a TD method
for a particular problem. First, embed the problem of interest in a larger

36 R. 8S. SUTTON

class of problems, if necessary, in order to produce an appropriate sequence
of predictions. Second, write down recursive equations expressing the desired
relationship between predictions at different times in the sequence. For the
simplest cases, with which this article has been mostly concerned, these are
just P; = P,41, whereas in the cumulative outcome case these are P; = Pr41+
C41. Third, construct an update rule that uses the mismatch in the recursive
equations to drive weight changes towards a better match. These three steps
are very similar to those taken in formulating a dynamic programming problem
(e.g., Denardo, 1982).

6. Related research

Although temporal-difference methods have never previously been identified
or studied on their own, we can view some previous machine learning research
as having used them. In this section we briefly review some of this previous
work in light of the ideas developed here.

6.1 Samuel’s checker-playing program

The earliest known use of a TD method was in Samuel’s (1959) celebrated
checker-playing program. This was in his “learning by generalization” proce-
dure, which modified the parameters of the function used to evaluate board
positions. The evaluation of a position was thought of as an estimate or pre-
diction of how the game would eventually turn out starting from that position.
Thus, the sequence of positions from an actual game or an anticipated contin-
uation naturally gave rise to a sequence of predictions, each about the game’s
final outcome.

In Samuel’s learning procedure, the difference between the evaluations of
each pair of successive positions occurring in a game was used as an error; that
is, it was used to alter the prediction associated with the first position of the
pair to be more like the prediction associated with the second. The predictions
for the two positions were computed in different ways. In most versions of
the program, the prediction for the first position was simply the result of
applying the current evaluation function to that position. The prediction for
the second position was the “backed-up” or minimax score from a lookahead
search started at that position, using the current evaluation function. Samuel
referred to the difference between these two predictions as delta. Although his
updating procedure was much more complicated than TD(0), his intent was
to use delta much as P;4, — FP; is used in (linear) TD(0).

However, Samuel’s learning procedure significantly differed from all the TD
methods discussed here in its treatment of the final step of a sequence. We have
considered each sequence to end with a definite, externally-supplied outcome
(e.g., 1 for a victory and 0 for a defeat). The prediction for the last position
in a sequence was altered so as to match this final outcome. In Samuel’s
procedure, on the other hand, no position had a definite a prior? evaluation,
and the evaluation for the last position in a sequence was never explicitly
altered. Thus, while both procedures constrained the evaluations (predictions)
of nonterminal positions to match those that follow them, Samuel’s provided

TEMPORAL-DIFFERENCE LEARNING 37

no additional constraint on the evaluation of terminal positions. As he himself
pointed out, many useless evaluation functions satisfy just the first constraint
(e.g., any function that is constant for all positions).

To discourage his learning procedure from finding useless evaluation func-
tions, Samuel included in the evaluation function a non-modifiable term mea-
suring how many more pieces his program had than its opponent. However,
although this modification may have decreased the likelihood of finding use-
less evaluation functions, it did not prohibit them. For example, a constant
function could still have been attained by setting the modifiable terms so as
to cancel the effect of the non-modifiable one.

If Samuel’s learning procedure was not constrained to find useful evaluation
functions, then it should have been possible for it to become worse with ex-
perience. In fact, Samuel reported observing this during extensive self-play
training sessions. He found that a good way to get the program improving
again was to set the weight with the largest absolute value back to zero. His in-
terpretation was that this drastic intervention jarred the program out of local
optima, but another possibility is that it jarred the program out of evaluation
functions that changed little, but that also had little to do with winning or
losing the game.

Nevertheless, Samuel’s learning procedure was overall very successful; it
played an important role in significantly improving the play of his checker-
playing program until it rivaled human checker masters. Christensen and Korf
have investigated a simplification of Samuel’s procedure that also does not
constrain the evaluations of terminal positions, and have obtained promis-
ing preliminary results (Christensen, 1986; Christensen & Korf, 1986). Thus.
although a terminal constraint may be critical to good temporal-difference
theory, apparently it is not strictly necessary to obtain good performance.

6.2 Backpropagation in connectionist networks

The backpropagation technique of Rumelhart et al. (1985) is one of the most
exciting recent developments in incremental learning methods. This technique
extends the Widrow-Hoff rule so that it can be applied to the interior “hidden”
units of multi-layer connectionist networks. In a backpropagation network, the
input-output functions of all units are deterministic and differentiable. As a
result, the partial derivatives of the error measure with respect to each connec-
tion weight are well-defined. and one can apply a gradient-descent approach
such as that used in the original Widrow-Hoff rule. The term “backpropa-
gation” refers to the way the partial derivatives are efficiently computed in a
backward propagating sweep through the network. As presented by Rumelhart
et al., backpropagation is explicitly a supervised-learning procedure.

The purpose of both backpropagation and TD methods is accurate credit
assignment. Backpropagation decides which part(s) of a network to change
so as to influence the network’s output and thus to reduce its overall error.
whereas TD methods decide how each output of a temporal sequence of outputs
should be changed. Backpropagation addresses a structural credit-assignment
issue whereas TD methods address a temporal credit-assignment issue.

38 R. 8. SUTTON

Although it currently seems that backpropagation and TD methods address
different parts of the credit-assignment problem, it is important to note that
they are perfectly compatible and easily combined. In this article, we have em-
phasized the linear case, but the TD methods presented are equally applicable
to predictions formed by nonlinear functions, such as backpropagation-style
networks. The key requirement is that the gradient VP be computable.
In a linear system, this is just z:. In a network of differentiable nonlinear
elements, it can be computed by a backpropagation process. For example, An-
derson (1986, 1987) has implemented such a combination of backpropagation
and a temporal-difference method (the Adaptive Heuristic Critic, see below),
successfully applying it to both a nonlinear broomstick-balancing task and the
Towers of Hanoi problem.

6.3 Holland’s bucket brigade

Holland’s (1986) bucket brigade is a technique for learning sequences of
rule invocations in a kind of adaptive production system called a classifier
system. The production rules in a classifier system compete to become active
and have their right-hand sides (called messages) posted to a working-memory
data structure (called the message list). Conflict resolution is carried out by
a competitive auction. Each rule that matches the current contents of the
message list makes a bid that depends on the product of its specificity and
its strength, a modifiable numerical parameter. The highest bidders become
active and post their messages to a new message list for the next round of the
auction.

The bucket brigade is the process that adjusts the strengths of the rules and
thereby determines which rules will become active at which times. When a
rule becomes active, it loses strength by the amount of its bid, but also gains
strength if the message it posts triggers other rules to become active in the
next round of the auction. The strength gained is exactly the bids of the other
rules. If several rules post the same message, then the bids of all responders are
pooled and divided equally among the posting rules. In principle, long chains
of rule invocations can be learned in this way, with strength being passed back
from rule to rule, thus the name “bucket brigade.” For a chain to be stable,
its final rule must affect the environment, achieve a goal, and thereby receive
new strength in the form of a payoff from the external environment.

Temporal-difference methods and the bucket brigade both borrow the same
key idea from Samuel’s work - that the steps in a sequence should be evalu-
ated and adjusted according to their immediate or near-immediate successors,
rather than according to the final outcome. The similarity between TD meth-
ods and the bucket brigade can be seen at a more detailed level by considering
the latter’s effect on a linear chain of rule invocations. Each rule’s strength can
be viewed as a prediction of the payoff that will ultimately be obtained from
the environment. Assuming equal specificities, the strength of each rule expe-
riences a net change dependent on the difference between that strength and the
strength of the succeeding rule. Thus, like TD(0), the bucket brigade updates
each strength (prediction) in a sequence of strengths (predictions) according
to the immediately following temporal difference in strength (prediction).

TEMPORAL-DIFFERENCE LEARNING 39

There are also numerous differences between the bucket brigade and the
TD methods presented here. The most important of these is that the bucket
brigade assigns credit based on the rules that caused other rules to become
active, whereas TD methods assign credit based solely on temporal succession.
The bucket brigade thus performs both temporal and structural credit assign-
ment in a single mechanism. This contrasts with the TD/backpropagation
combination discussed in the preceding subsection, which uses separate mech-
anisms for each kind of credit assignment. The relative advantages of these
two approaches are still to be determined.

6.4 Infinite discounted predictions and the Adaptive Heuristic Critic

All the prediction problems we have considered so far have had definite
outcomes. That is, after some point in time the actual outcome corresponding
to each prediction became known. Supervised-learning methods require this
property, because they make no learning changes until the actual outcome is
discovered, but in some problems it never becomes completely known. For
example, suppose one wishes to predict the total return from investing in the
stock of various companies; unless a company goes out of business, total return
is never fully determined.

Actually, there is a problem of definition here: if a company never goes out
of business and earns income every year, the total return can be infinite. For
reasons of this sort, infinite-horizon prediction problems usually include some
form of discounting. For example, if some process generates costs c,41 at each
transition from ¢t to t+ 1, we may want P, to predict the discounted sum:

foe)
k
at = > Y Ct+k+1>
k=0

where the discount-rate parameter y, 0 < y < 1, determines the extent to
which we are concerned with short-range or long-range prediction.

If F should equal the above z;, then what are the recursive equations defin-
ing the desired relationship between temporally successive predictions? If the
predictions are accurate, we can write

oo
k
Po= 5 Cte k+1
k=0

fe)
k
= Ce41 +907 Cte kt2
k=0
= Cr+ 7Pe4i.

The mismatch or TD error is the difference between the two sides of this
equation, (¢.41 +7Pi41) -—.° Sutton’s (1984) Adaptive Heuristic Critic uses

®Witten (1977) first proposed updating predictions of a discounted sum based on a dis-
crepancy of this sort.

40 R. 8. SUTTON

this error in a learning rule otherwise identical to TD(A)’s:

t
Aw: = afer + Pit. — FB) S> NV wy Pr,
k=1

where P, is the linear form w? 2,, so that VP; = 2. Thus, the Adaptive
Heuristic Critic is probably best understood as using the linear TD method
for predicting discounted cumulative outcomes.

7. Conclusion

These analyses and experiments suggest that TD methods may be the learn-
ing methods of choice for many real-world learning problems. We have argued
that many of these problems involve temporal sequences of observations and
predictions. Whereas conventional, supervised-learning approaches disregard
this temporal structure, TD methods are specially tailored to it. As a re-
sult, they can be computed more incrementally and require significantly less
memory and peak computation. One TD method makes exactly the same
predictions and learning changes as a supervised-learning method, while re-
taining these computational advantages. Another TD method makes different
learning changes, but has been proved to converge asymptotically to the same
correct predictions. Empirically, TD methods appear to learn faster than
supervised-learning methods, and one TD method has been proved to make
optimal predictions for finite training sets that are presented repeatedly. Over-
all, TD methods appear to be computationally cheaper and to learn faster than
conventional approaches to prediction learning.

The progress made in this paper has been due primarily to treating TD
methods as general methods for learning to predict rather than as special-
ized methods for learning evaluation functions, as they were in all previous
work. This simplification makes their theory much easier and also greatly
broadens their range of applicability. It is now clear that TD methods can be
used for any pattern recognition problem in which data are gathered over time
— for example, speech recognition, process monitoring, target identification,
and market-trend prediction. Potentially, all of these can benefit from the
advantages of TD methods vis-a-vis supervised-learning methods. In speech
recognition, for example, current learning methods cannot be applied until the
correct classification of the word is known. This means that all critical infor-
mation about the waveform and how it was processed must be stored for later
credit assignment. If learning proceeded simultaneously with processing, as in
TD methods, this storage would be avoided, making it practical to consider
far more features and combinations of features.

As general prediction-learning methods, temporal-difference methods can
also be applied to the classic problem of learning an internal model of the world.
Much of what we mean by having such a model is the ability to predict the
future based on current actions and observations. This prediction problem is
a multi-step one, and the external world is well modeled as a causal dynamical
system; hence TD methods should be applicable and advantageous. Sutton

TEMPORAL-DIFFERENCE LEARNING 41

and Pinette (1985) and Sutton and Barto (1981b) have begun to pursue one
approach along these lines, using TD methods and recurrent connectionist
networks.

Animals must also face the problem of learning internal models of the world.
The learning process that seems to perform this function in animals is called
Pavlovian or classtcal conditioning. For example, if a dog is repeatedly pre-
sented with the sound of a bell and then fed, it will learn to predict the meal
given just the bell, as evidenced by salivation to the bell alone. Some of the
detailed features of this learning process suggest that animals may be using a
TD method (Kehoe, Schreurs, & Graham, 1987; Sutton & Barto, 1987).

Acknowledgements

The author acknowledges especially the assistance of Andy Barto, Martha
Steenstrup, Chuck Anderson, John Moore, and Harry Klopf. I also thank
Oliver Selfridge, Pat Langley, Ron Rivest, Mike Grimaldi, John Aspinall, Gene
Cooperman, Bud Frawley, Jonathan Bachrach, Mike Seymour, Steve Epstein,
Jim Kehoe, Les Servi, Ron Williams, and Marie Goslin. The early stages of
this research were supported by AFOSR contract F33615-83-C-1078.

References

Ackley, D. H., Hinton, G. H., & Sejnowski, T. J. (1985). A learning algorithm
for Boltzmann machines. Cognitive Science, 9, 147-169.

Anderson, C. W. (1986). Learning and problem solving with multilayer con-
nectionist systems. Doctoral dissertation, Department of Computer and
Information Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.

Anderson, C. W. (1987). Strategy learning with multilayer connectionist repre-
sentations. Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on Machine
Learning (pp. 103-114). Irvine, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.

Barto, A. G. (1985). Learning by statistical cooperation of self-interested
neuron-like computing elements. Human Neurobiology, 4, 229-256.

Barto, A. G., Sutton R. S., & Anderson, C. W. (1983). Neuronlike elements
that can solve difficult learning control problems. JEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 18, 834 -846.

Booker, L. B. (1982). Intelligent behavior as an adaptation to the task envi-
ronment. Doctoral dissertation, Department of Computer and Communi-
cation Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Christensen, J. (1986}. Learning static evaluation functions by linear regres-
sion. In T. M. Mitchell, J. G. Carbonell, & R.S. Michalski (Eds.), Machine
learning: A guide to current research. Boston: Kluwer Academic.

Christensen, J., & Korf, R. E. (1986). A unified theory of heuristic evaluation
functions and its application to learning. Proceedings of the Fifth National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 148 152). Philadelphia, PA:
Morgan Kaufmann.

Denardo, E. V. (1982). Dynamic programming: Models and applications. En-
glewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

42 R. S. SUTTON

Dietterich, T. G., & Michalski, R. S. (1986). Learning to predict. sequences.
In R. S. Michalski, J. G. Carbonell, & T. M. Mitchell (Eds.), Machine
learning: An artificial intelligence approach (Vol. 2). Los Altos, CA:
Morgan Kaufmann.

Gelperin, A., Hopfield, J. J., Tank, D. W. (1985). The logic of Zimaz learning.
In A. Selverston (Ed.), Model neural networks and behavior. New York:
Plenum Press.

Hampson, S. E. (1983). A neural model of adaptive behavior. Doctoral disser-
tation, Department of Information and Computer Science, University of
California, Irvine.

Hampson, S. E., & Volper, D. J. (1987). Disjunctive models of boolean cate-
gory learning. Biological Cybernetics, 56, 121-137.

Holland, J. H. (1986). Escaping brittleness: The possibilities of general-
purpose learning algorithms applied to parallel rule-based systems. In
R. S. Michalski, J. G. Carbonell, & T. M. Mitchell (Eds.}, Machine learn-
ing: An artificial intelligence approach (Vol. 2). Los Altos, CA: Morgan
Kaufmann.

Kehoe, E. J., Schreurs, B. G., & Graham, P. (1987). Temporal primacy over-
rides prior training in serial compound conditioning of the rabbit's nicti-
tating membrane response. Animal Learning and Behavior, 15, 455-464.

Kemeny, J. G., & Snell, J. L. (1976). Finite Markov chains. New York:
Springer-Verlag.

Klopf, A. H. (1987). A neuronal model of classical conditioning (Technical
Report 87-1139). OH: Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Wright Aero-
nautical Laboratories.

Moore, J. W., Desmond, J. E., Berthier, N. E., Blazis, D. E. J., Sutton, R. S.,
& Barto, A. G. (1986). Simulation of the classically conditioned nicti-
tating membrane response by a neuron-like adaptive element: Response
topography, neuronal firing and interstimulus intervals. Behavioral Brain
Research, 21, 143-154.

Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., & Williams, R. J. (1985). Learning inter-
nal representations by error propagation (Technical Report No. 8506). La
Jolla: University of California, San Diego, Institute for Cognitive Science.
Also in D. E. Rumelhart & J. L. McClelland (Eds.), Parallel distributed
processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition (Vol. 1), Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.

Samuel, A. L. (1959). Some studies in machine learning using the game
of checkers. IBM Journal on Research and Development, 3, 210-229.
Reprinted in E. A. Feigenbaum & J. Feldman (Eds.), Computers and
thought. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Sutton, R. S. (1984). Temporal credit assignment in reinforcement learning.
Doctoral dissertation, Department of Computer and Information Science,
University of Massachusetts, Amherst.

Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1981a). Toward a modern theory of adaptive
networks: Expectation and prediction. Psychological Review, 88, 135-171.

TEMPORAL-DIFFERENCE LEARNING 43

Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1981b). An adaptive network that constructs
and uses an internal model of its environment. Cognition and Brain The-
ory, 4, 217-246.

Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1987). A temporal-difference model of classical
conditioning. Proceedings of the Ninth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 355-378}. Seattle, WA: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Sutton, R. 8., & Pinette, B. (1985). The learning of world models by con-
nectionist networks. Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 54-64). Irvine, CA: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Varga, R. S. (1962). Matrix iterative analysis. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall.

Widrow B., & Hoff, M. E. (1960). Adaptive switching circuits. 1960 WESCON
Convention Record, Part IV (pp. 96-104).

Widrow, B., & Stearns, S. D. (1985). Adaptive signal processing. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Williams, R. J. (1986). Reinforcement learning in connectionist networks: A
mathematical analysis (Technical Report No. 8605). La Jolla: University
of California, San Diego, Institute for Cognitive Science.

Witten, I. H. (1977). An adaptive optimal controller for discrete-time Markov
environments. Information and Control, 34, 286-295.

44 R. 8. SUTTON

Appendix: Accessory Theorems

Theorem A.1 [flimp—oo A” = 0, then I-A has an inverse, and (I-A) l=
Dizo 4.
PROOF: See Kemeny and Snell (1976, p. 22).

Theorem A.2 For any matriz A with linearly independent columns, A™ A is
nonsingular.
Proor: If A7A were singular, then there would exist a vector y # 0 such
that

0 = AT Ay;

0 = y" AT Ay = (Ay)? Ay,

which would imply that Ay = 0, contradicting the assumptions that y 4 0 and
that A has lmearly independent columns.

Theorem A.3 A square matriz A is positive definite if and only if A+ AT
is positive definite.
PROOF:

1 1 1 1
TA — Tre oa 2 AT _ 2 4T
y Ay 7] (S44 5At 5A 54 y

i
= 5u (A +A+A™T—AT)y

1 1
= sy (A+ Aly + 5u (A ~AT)y,

But the second term is 0, because y?(A—A?)y = (y?(A—AT)y)? = y? (AT -
A)y = —y?(A— A™)y, and the only number that equals its own inverse is 0.

Therefore,
1
y" Ay = Sy" (A+ AT )y,
implying that y? Ay and y?(A + AT)y always have the same sign, and thus

either A and A+ A? are both positive definite, or neither is positive definite.
