2406.12181v1 [cs.HC] 18 Jun 2024

arXiv

Designing Interactions with Shared AVs in
Complex Urban Mobility Scenarios

Marius Hoggenmueller
Design Lab, Sydney School of Architecture, Design and Planning
The University of Sydney

marius.hoggenmueller@sydney.edu.au

Martin Tomitsch
Design Lab, Sydney School of Architecture, Design and Planning
The University of Sydney

martin.tomitsch@sydney.edu.au

Stewart Worrall
Australian Centre for Field Robotics
The University of Sydney

stewart .worrall@sydney.edu.au

June 19, 2024

Abstract

In this paper, we report on the design and evaluation of an external
human-machine interface (eHMI) for a real autonomous vehicle (AV),
developed to operate as a shared transport pod in a pedestrianised urban
space. We present insights about our human-centred design process, which
included testing initial concepts through a tangible toolkit and evaluating
360-degree recordings of a staged pick-up scenario in virtual reality. Our
results indicate that in complex mobility scenarios, participants filter for
critical eHMI messages; further, we found that implicit cues (i.e. pick-up
manoeuvre and proximity to the rider) influence participants’ experience
and trust, while at the same time more explicit interaction modes are
desired. This highlights the importance of considering interactions with

shared AVs as a service more holistically, in order to develop knowledge

about AV-pedestrian interactions in complex mobility scenarios that com-

plements more targeted eHMI evaluations.

1 Introduction

Fully autonomous vehicles (AVs) have the potential to not only mitigate accidents
caused by human errors, but also fundamentally transform the way people
commute in cities (Kellett et al., 2019). Recent endeavours from government
institutions and industry indicate a trend towards shared autonomous vehicles
(SAVs) as a likely future mobility scenario, rather than people owning their
personal vehicles (Narayanan et al., 2020; Iclodean et al., 2020). The promise of
this approach is that the deployment of SAV services can have a positive impact
on the quality of urban life, with less land being devoted to parking and less
congestion. Models predict that the required fleet of SAVs to move the same
number of people can be met with 70% of the current taxi fleet for New York
City and that the demand is equivalent to 30% of the number of today’s personal
vehicles for Singapore (Pavone, 2015).

The ubiquitous roll-out of AVs and SAVs is closely linked to overcoming tech-
nological challenges, such as sensing (Ilas, 2013), in particular during poor light-
ing conditions (Yoneda et al., 2019), and optimising routing algorithms (Levin
et al., 2017). At the same time, considering the human factors, including those
affecting people outside the vehicle, has gained attention from industry and
academia (Mora et al., 2020). For example, there is an increasing body of
work investigating the use of external human-machine interfaces (eHMIs) to
overcome the challenge of how AVs can communicate their internal state to
nearby pedestrians. Examples range from projections on the street (Nguyen
et al., 2019) to using light strips attached to the vehicle (Dey et al., 2020b; Eisma
et al., 2020). A recent literature review by Dey et al. (2020a) found that the
majority of concepts only focuses on communicating information related to the
vehicle’s yielding intent (i.e. whether it is safe for other road users to cross in
front of a vehicle); further, concepts which have been evaluated through empirical
studies mainly cover simplistic traffic scenarios, for example, one person crossing
a roadway in front of an AV (Colley et al., 2020b). This indicates that there
remain several unresolved questions when it comes to designing interactions
between SAVs and pedestrians that are not addressed by previous eHMI con-

cepts and empirical studies. Many open questions remain, such as whether an

eHML is able to successfully encode information that is broadcast to the general
public (e.g. a vehicle’s intention and awareness) while at the same time showing
information relevant to a particular rider (e.g. to identify which SAV is theirs).
Further, with the roll-out of SAVs as a last-mile transport mode between larger
hubs, such as train stations, and the passengers’ final destination (Yap et al.,
2016), it is likely that those vehicles will operate in pedestrianised areas rather
than on dedicated roads. A government report published by one of Australia’s
transport authorities noted that research on pedestrian safety in shared spaces
is widely underrepresented (NSW Centre for Road Safety, 2015), which echoes
the systematic review by Dey et al. (2020a), finding that eHMI studies mainly
focus on intersections and crossings.

In this paper, we report on findings from a research project that involved
designing a low-resolution lighting-based eHMI for a shared passenger transport
pod. Following a toolkit-supported human-centred design process, we developed
an eHMI to display the vehicle’s status, intent, and awareness, as well as to
enable users to identify their vehicle. To evaluate the eHMI, we devised a ride-
sharing scenario with multiple vehicles commuting in a shared urban environment
where pedestrians, cyclists, and maintenance vehicles share the same road.
The scenario was captured with a 360-degree video camera and represented to
participants (N=14) in a virtual reality (VR) environment. Through this study
setup and feedback collected from participants via semi-structured interviews,
we investigated the efficacy of eEHMI communication in complex urban mobility
scenarios. We specifically focused on three aims: The use of eHMIs to convey
multiple messages simultaneously, participants’ perception of multiple AVs and
their eHMIs, and AV-pedestrian interactions for SAVs in a shared space.

The paper contributes to the field of automotive user interfaces broadly and
to AV-pedestrian interaction specifically in two ways. First, it offers insights
about the role of implicit (e.g. vehicle behaviour) and explicit (e.g. eHMI) cues
and how people perceive those cues in different scenarios (e.g. crossing versus
pick-up). Second, it provides an account of human-centred methods and their

value for designing AV-pedestrian interaction in complex scenarios.

2 Related Work

2.1 AV-Pedestrian Interfaces

In recent years, researchers have stressed that autonomous vehicles require ad-
ditional means to communicate to other road users (Mahadevan et al., 2018;
Rasouli and Tsotsos, 2020). Due to the absence of a human driver, interpersonal
communication (e.g. eye contact or gestures) and the manual use of signalling
devices (e.g. indicators, horn) are not longer available. However, researchers
stressed that such communication cues are important, in particular in dense
urban areas, where vehicles share spaces with vulnerable road users (e.g. pedes-
trians) (Hollander et al., 2021) and right-of-way negotiation is necessary. As a
consequence of addressing this issue, there exists now a growing body of work
on external human-machine interfaces (eHMIs) (Dey et al., 2020a). Concepts
range from projection-based eHMIs (Nguyen et al., 2019) to such attached
to the vehicle itself, for example light band eHMIs (Dey et al., 2020b). In
right-of-way negotiations (de Clercq et al., 2019), most of the eHMI concepts
incorporate the vehicle’s yielding intent (Dey et al., 2020b). While there has
been research suggesting that pedestrians mainly inform their crossing decision
based on implicit cues, such as motion (Moore et al., 2019; Dey et al., 2017;
Risto et al., 2017), other empirical studies have shown that status+intent eHMIs
can significantly reduce the risk of collisions with AVs (M. Faas et al., 2021)
and increase pedestrians’ subjective feeling of safety (Hollander et al., 2019).
Other research on eHMIs has studied interface placement on the vehicle (Eisma
et al., 2020), communication modalities (e.g. light band eHMIs for abstract
representations (Dey et al., 2020b), or higher resolution displays for text and
symbols (Hollander et al., 2019; Chang et al., 2017)), as well as message per-
spective (Eisma et al., 2021). Furthermore, researchers began to investigate
external communication concepts beyond crossing scenarios: for example, Col-
ley and Rukzio (2020) investigated the specific situation in which automated
delivery trucks would block parts of the road and sidewalks and designed and
evaluated a visualisation concept that guides pedestrians to safely walk past the
truck. Others conceptualised autonomous vehicles as public displays that can
do more than display information related to the vehicle’s operational task and
pedestrian safety, such as showing navigation cues and advertisements (Colley
et al., 2017; Asha et al., 2020; Colley et al., 2018). However, despite the plethora
of eHMI concepts, systematic reviews (Dey et al., 2020a; Colley et al., 2020a)

have emphasised that a majority of design concepts are limited to one specific
traffic situation, mostly uncontrolled zebra crossings, and only few empirical
evaluations take into account urban contexts beyond the road, such as shared
spaces (Li et al., 2021).

2.2 Shared Autonomous Vehicles

The global rise of ride-sharing services (e.g. Uber) and the expected uptake
of SAVs has led to growing interest from the human-computer interaction
(HCI) community (Eden et al., 2017). Researchers began to systematically
study aspects that influence passenger’s experience and trust towards those
services, including trip planning (Svangren et al., 2018), and how to design for
in-vehicle experiences (Khamissi and Pfleging, 2019; Braun et al., 2018), for
example, informing passengers about their current trip (Flohr et al., 2020) or
communicating the vehicle’s driving decisions (Sandhaus and Hornecker, 2018).
Researchers have also identified potential security concerns of sharing AVs with
others (Schuf et al., 2021) and explored the needs of specific user groups, such
as the elderly (Gluck et al., 2020) or children (Kim et al., 2019), with the aim to
design for more inclusive in-vehicle experiences.

On the other hand, passenger’s experience with SAV services in situations
outside the vehicle (e.g. while waiting for an approaching vehicle) has received
little attention so far. To the best of our knowledge, only Florentine et al.
(2016) and Verma et al. (2019b) developed design concepts for eHMIs on SAVs,
but those only focused on displaying intent, did not specifically address a
passenger-pedestrian perspective, and were evaluated in crossing situations only.
Owensby et al. (2018) developed a framework for designing interactions between
pedestrians and autonomous vehicles in more complex scenarios. They used a
ride-sharing scenario as a foundation for developing and validating the framework.
Building on the work from Robertson and Loke (2009) on designing situations,
the first proposed step is to break down the scenario into different stages (used
synonymously for situations that unfold in an AV-pedestrian interaction scenario).
Those stages are then mapped onto three high-level dimensions addressed for each
specific situation: how information is being presented, the interactions between
user and system, and the user needs being addressed. While the framework is
a good starting point (and indeed provided us with the conceptual foundation
for our own design process), it has not previously been applied or validated in a
larger study. Using the framework as a foundation, in this paper, we designed

a comprehensive and consistent set of eHMI visualisations for a shared AV
and evaluated those in a contextualised study setup (ie. an immersive VR
environment (Flohr et al., 2020)).

3 Design Process

In this section, we report on the iterative process of designing the eHMI for an
autonomous transport pod as part of an interdisciplinary research project. The
project team involved robotic engineers (referred to as “engineering team” in
this section), interaction designers (referred to as “design team”) and urban
planners. During the 8 months design process (i.e. from initial discussions up to
the completion of the VR prototype), we had regular internal planning meetings
approximately once every two weeks. In the meetings, the larger team provided
feedback to the design team on the eHMI light pattern iterations and planned
further research activities, such as the design exploration sessions with external
experts. The urban planners provided targeted advice on the chosen urban
context and scenario. Below we describe the a) chosen urban context, scenario,
and unfolding situations that the eHMI was designed for, b) the hardware setup,
c) the design of the eHMI concept, which was informed by toolkit-supported
collaborative design exploration sessions with external experts, and d) the VR
prototype, which was used to evaluate the scenario and eHMI with potential

users.

3.1 Urban Context, Scenario and Situations

As the study used an existing, fully functional AV, we selected an urban context
that suited the operational specifications of the vehicle. The AV was developed
as a pod rather than a full-scale car, allowing it to operate in shared spaces.
The engineering team had been granted permission to operate the AV on our
university’s campus, which resembles a shared space, as our campus avenues are
frequented by pedestrians, cyclists, and authorised vehicles (e.g. for delivery
or maintenance). Thus, we situated our AV-pedestrian interaction scenario on
one of our university’s main avenues with no road markings and a consistent
amount of pedestrian traffic. As a specific scenario, we chose a passenger
pick-up scenario given the likely role that SAVs will play in future mobility
implementations (Schu8 et al., 2021). SAVs have further been implemented
on less traveled routes, such as University campuses, already (Iclodean et al.,

Figure 1: Passenger transport pod with ” U”-shaped low-res lighting display.

2020). Choosing this scenario also allowed our study participants to draw on
their previous experience with ride-sharing services, such as Uber.

The scenario further allowed us to map out and design how the eHMI would
support AV-pedestrian interaction for a number of specific situations. In other
words, we broke down the complex urban scenario of interacting with multiple
ride-sharing vehicles in a shared space into a set of situations. Specifically, we
identified four situations, using the framework by Owensby et al. (2018), which
outlines interactions in an autonomous ride-sharing scenario. The situations
involved (1) an SAV driving along the shared avenue, (2) the SAV pulling over
to pick up a rider, (3) the rider boarding the SAV, and (4) a pedestrian crossing
in front of an SAV (in order to illustrate that the vehicle is aware of surrounding
people). The chosen situations required us to address the four user requirements
previously identified by Owensby et al. (2018) for autonomous ride-sharing
scenarios, namely (1) being able to identify the vehicle, (2) knowing the current
status of the vehicle, (3) knowing the vehicle’s intent, and (4) that the vehicle is
aware of the user (the rider and surrounding pedestrians).

3.2 Passenger Transport Pod and eHMI Hardware

We designed the eHMI visualisations for a fully functional AV passenger transport
pod, which was also used later on for the recording of the immersive 360-degree

prototype. The AV hardware was designed by AEV Roboticd]] and was further
customised by our engineering team. The platforms have the sensing and
computation capacity to eventually operate at SAE level Ff and are based on
the robot operating system (ROS). The vehicles — being small, efficient and
electrically powered — were designed for the purpose to operate safely in low
speed road environments (under 40 kph). This makes them suitable to operate
in close proximity to pedestrians (Pavone, 2015). One single vehicle is intended
to carry up to two passengers.

The engineering team decided early on to use an LED-based low-resolution
(low-res) lighting display to implement the final eHMI. This decision was made
due to the relatively low power consumption of LEDs, thus being able to power
the eHMI with the vehicle’s on-board battery. Furthermore, LED light strips are
a widely available technology which makes it easy to apply this eHMI solution
to similar AV platforms (Dey et al., 2020a). Low-res lighting displays have been
previously studied in pervasive display research as they allow to communicate
information at the periphery of attention (Offenhuber and Seitinger, 2014)
and can be perceived from a distance in outdoor environments (Wiethoff and
Hoggenmueller, 2017). For this reasons, low-res lighting displays have been also
widely used for the implementation of eHMIs in crossing scenarios (e.g. Verma
et al. (2019a); Dey et al. (2020b)), and previous research has indicated that simple
visual cues are easy to understand also in particular for child pedestrians (Charisi
et al., 2017).

The engineering team installed off-the-shelf LED strip¢?} around the front
window of the vehicle in a ”U”-shape (see Figure fi). The LED strips featured
a pitch of 60 pixels per meter, resulting in a total of 145 LEDs. The LEDs
were controlled via an Arduino board, which was connected to the system of
the vehicle. A python ROS node read the information from the vehicle state
by subscribing to the relevant information. Light patterns were triggered in
real-time based on the sensed information (awareness) and the state of the AV
platform (intent). After conducting several tests in the real-world and under
different lighting conditions, the designers advised the engineering team to install
a diffuser tube of opal white acrylic wrapped around the LEDs. Following design

lnttps://www.instagram.com/aevrobotics/, last accessed: January 2022

?The automation levels are defined by the Society for Automotive Engineers (SAE) for
autonomous driving. Level 5 refers to full automation: https: //www.sae.org/news/2019/01/
sae-updates- j3016-automated-driving-graphic, last accessed: January 2022

Shttps://www.pololu.com/category/180/sk6812-ws2812b-based-led-strips, last ac-
cessed: January 2022

recommendations for low-res lighting displays (Hoggenmueller et al., 2018), this
decision was made to improve the viewing angle and to create the illusion of
a light bar (rather than a distinct set of point light sources). At this stage of
the design process, we also took into account the subsequent production of the
virtual reality prototype using a 360-degree camera (see section 3.4). For this
particular purpose, adding the diffuser tubes significantly improved the visibility
of the eHMI and eliminated the glaring effect in the recordings that we observed
when capturing the LEDs without the diffuser tubes.

3.3 Designing eHMI Light Patterns

Designing the eHMI light patterns for the low-res lighting display, the design
team followed an iterative design process, which involved the use of a tangible
toolkit for prototyping AV-pedestrian interactions (Hoggenmiiller et al., 2020).
The toolkit was used to (a) quickly prototype different visualisation concepts, (b)
present concepts during internal team meetings in a more tangible manner, and
(c) to facilitate collaborative design exploration sessions with recruited expert
participants to further inform the design of the eHMI light patterns. Below we
describe the key features of the prototyping toolkit, the results from seven expert
workshops and the final set of eHMI light patterns.

3.3.1 Tangible Multi-Display Toolkit

Building on small-scale scenario prototyping techniques (Pettersson and Ju,
2017) tailored to the context of AV-pedestrian interfaces, a toolkit approach was
used to inform the eHMI visualisation design (Figure 2). The toolkit enables
multiple viewing angles and perspectives to be captured simultaneously (e.g.
top-view, first-person pedestrian view) through computer-generated simulations
orchestrated across multiple displays. Users are able to directly interact with the
simulated environment through tangibles, which physically simulate the inter-
face’s behaviour (in our case through an integrated LED display). Furthermore,
a configuration app running on a separate tablet allows to control and adjust the
design options in real-time. For the purpose of our project, this allowed users to
change between various light patterns and adjust colour schemes and animation
speed.

wee eee eee '
| Shared Space Env. ego-perspective
\
Car is driving and

: will slow down
© Car is detecting

! another person
[3] Car is indicating

1 to pullover

NY top view

© Car is picking up

| @ person

Figure 2: The tangible multi-display toolkit used to inform the eHMI visualisation
design via computer simulations across multiple displays to capture different
viewing angles, tangible objects to interact with the simulated environment and
to depict the eHMI’s behaviour through an integrated miniature LED display.

3.3.2. Expert Workshops

We conducted seven workshop sessions in total, with each session involving a pair
of external expert participants. The aim of the workshops was to receive feedback
on light pattern candidates and identify a final set for further implementation
on the AV. We recruited 14 participants (seven male, seven female) of various
academic and professional backgrounds, covering a range of expertise considered
relevant for the design of urban technologies (Tomitsch and Hoggenmueller,
2020; Malizia et al., 2018). Their areas of expertise included architecture and
urban planning (n=5), human-computer interaction (n=5), psychology (n=2),
software engineering (n=1) and civil engineering (n=1). Each workshop session
lasted 90 minutes in total and was video-recorded for later analysis. Having
participant pairs allowed the experts to have more natural conversations with
each other (Nielsen, 1994). This co-participation setup has further been found
to be preferred by participants and to detect a higher number of usability issues
when evaluating design proposals (Mayhew and Alhadreti, 2018). Participants
were randomly paired.

In preparation of the workshop we implemented 12 different light patterns for
our four AV-pedestrian situations (i.e. three pattern candidates per situation)
for a ride-sharing scenario with the toolkit. The design of the light patterns was
informed by previous eHMI research (Nguyen et al., 2019; Mahadevan et al.,
2018; Florentine et al., 2016; Dey et al., 2018; Bockle et al., 2017) and went
through several iterations based on internal discussions within the project team:

for example, at the beginning of the design process, we considered re-purposing

10

the SAV’s existing front lights to indicate the intent to pull over. However, we
rejected this idea later and opted for an eHMI solution that would integrate
all messages in the same display space. This decision was made for aesthetic
purposes but also in regards to the emerging research question whether a single
low-res display would be capable to successfully communicate multiple eHMI
messages (Dey et al., 2020a). Considering related literature on ambient light
systems (Matviienko et al., 2015), we applied different information encoding
parameters (e.g. colour, brightness, LED position, or combinations thereof)
for the different light pattern candidates. For example, for the situation of the
vehicle slowly moving in autonomous mode, we designed a purely colour-based
pattern to indicate low speed, a pattern encoding slow speed through the size
of the light bar (i.e. the numbers of adjacent LEDs lighting up), and a pulsing
pattern changing the brightness at a low frequency. Participants were presented
with each of the 12 light patterns and asked to interpret their meaning and to
provide feedback on the eHMI visualisation design. Participants were encouraged
to make changes to the colour schemes via the configuration app as part of their
design exploration. At the end of each workshop, we asked participants to select
their preferred set of light patterns across all four situations.

3.3.3 Final Set of Light Patterns

Based on the analysis of the participant input collected during the workshops,
we derived several insights that guided our subsequent design decisions. These
included: avoiding the use of red and green colours, using subtle light patterns
by default (in regards to the shared space context in which pedestrians have
right of way), using strong signals only when the car is going to do something
unexpected or in high-risk situations, using a light pattern that is distinct from
a turn signal when pulling over to pick-up a rider, and using a subtle animation
for indicating the rider to get on the car (to avoid that the rider feels rushed or
distracted during the boarding process). In particular, the use of red and green
colours to indicate the vehicle’s speed caused confusion or different opinions
among our workshop participants. While the majority of participants could
establish a connection to the vehicle’s speed, some participants interpreted the
colours the opposite of our intention to encode low speeds through green colours,
reversibly using red at high speeds. Even those participants who interpreted the
colours correctly expressed their concerns about the potential ambiguity of this

approach. Furthermore, encoding the vehicle’s current speed and speed intent

11

Situation eHMI message Light Pattern

Lit up pixels at the center of the horizontal bar fade in

SAV driving along a shared avenue _ Indicating that the SAV is in autonomous driving
and out constantly in a 2.5 second cycle

mode and aware of its surroundings

stop horizontal bar up to the center of the left/right vertical
LED strip in a 1.2 second cycle

All pixels are lit up and periodically fade in and out

A rider boarding an SAV Indicating to the rider that it is safe to board
in a 2 second cycle

the SAV

SAV pulling over to pick up a rider —_ Indicating the SAV's intent to pull over and a Lit up pixels move back and forth from the center of the

| Lit up pixels expand from the centre of the horizontal bar
Hi to the entire display space and colour fades to yellow
(t=0.5sec); after detection pixels fade back (t=2.5sec).

Indicating to a pedestrian that it is Make a pedestrian aware of stepping into
safe to cross in front of the SAV the operational area and that it is safe to
cross in front of the SAV

Figure 3: Overview of the encoded eHMI messages and light patterns linked to
the previously identified situations. Light pattern L1-L3 are in purple colour
which we used in the VR study for participants to indicate their vehicle.

(acceleration/deceleration) was deemed as rather not relevant in a consistent
low-speed environment. Instead, participants preferred the AV to signal that it
is operating in a low-speed autonomous driving mode to express that the vehicle
is always aware of its surroundings.

Following the workshops, the design team revised the light patterns and
implemented them as a simulation in Adobe After Effects. These simulations
were then passed onto the engineering team along with a specification document
for each pattern. The engineering team implemented the patterns as eHMI
visualisations for the AV, to allow for further testing in a real-world context. The
final eHMI visualisations and light patterns are depicted in Figure 8} As colour
was deemed the most intuitive way for a low-res lighting display to represent
the identification of the vehicle, we decided to represent the remaining messages
(status, intent) through animation patterns only. This design decision was
also confirmed through the feedback from workshop participants who mostly
considered LED position and animations sufficient to encode those messages
and suggested to avoid the use of red and green colours related to the vehicle’s
status. Thus, the identification of the vehicle through colour is laid on top of
the other cues. If the vehicle is not intending to pick up a rider, the animation
pattern is displayed in a more neutral white. Only for the awareness cue, we
decided to use a yellow colour in order to add further emphasis on the potential
safety hazard through an additional change in colour. We decided for yellow as
a more neutral colour compared to red (i.e. as previously suggested by (Dey
et al., 2020b) for eHMIs), and this was also confirmed by some of our workshop
participants, who associated red with a potential malfunctioning of the vehicle.

12

Vehicle Paths

leaving Gussie
cored i)

27 O->* i

ic
:
@ 83, e
‘Actor 3%
.

0
4 ‘
Participant BD ce
position in VR 51-3 52
Actor 1 Actor 2
eHMI Light Patterns Actors
@ Light band on the bottom constantly Actor 1: Giving the appecrance of another
pulsing to indicate slow speed autono- rider rating ‘or their SAV (present in ail three
scenes).

mous operation

@ Light band sweeping to the left / right actor 2; Play-acting another rider waiting for
to indicate pulling over the second SAV (that approaches in'$2), then
@ All LEDs uniformly pulsing to indicate getting on the vehicle and riding.
pedestrian to get on the cor _ :
IAILLEDs flash ee pedlestrt Actor 3: Mimicking a pedestrian that crosses
[o) s floshing to make pedestrian | the road) (in 33) without ooking out for the
awgre of stepping into the operctionel — Gppreacing SAV

Scene 2, Light Pattern 3

Figure 4: Recording plan of the three scenes, vehicle trajectories and eHMI light
patterns (left); screenshot taken from the 360-degree video prototype representing
the second scene with an actor entering the SAV (right).

3.4 Virtual Reality Prototype

To safely test the eHMI visualisations in a real context, we opted for creating a
360-degree virtual reality (VR) prototype representation. This kind of prototype,
also referred to as hyperreal prototype (Hoggenmueller and Tomitsch, 2019), has
been found to result in an increased sense of familiarity in participants (Gerber
et al., 2019) compared to other representations, such as computer-generated
VR prototypes. VR was chosen over a field study to reduce any potential risk
for study participants and as it is a commonly used approach for evaluating
AVs and their eHMIs (Deb et al., 2017). Using a pre-recorded video prototype
further enabled us to test the situations under the exact same conditions across
participants, thus balancing ecological validity and reproducibility of the study
findings.

We started with creating storyboards to capture the staged situations and
interactions, which involved four actors to represent a pedestrian crossing in front
of the SAV, a person boarding an SAV, a person waiting for their SAV to arrive,
and a rider inside the SAV. We decided to spread our four situations over three
consecutive scenes (Figure (4). This decision was made for two reasons: firstly, all
staged AV-pedestrian interactions had to occur not too far away from the camera
stand for later visibility in VR; secondly, we wanted to give participants the
impression that multiple SAVs are commuting through the shared space rather
than a single one, however we only had one eHMI-equippped AV available. The

scenes (represented from the perspective of the study participant) included: (1)

13

The SAV passing through the shared environment without any staged interactions
with pedestrians, (2) the SAV pulling over and picking up another rider (Actor 2
in Figure), and (3) the SAV indicating to pull over to the camera stand. In the
third scene, a pedestrian (Actor 3 in Figure|4}) crosses in front of the SAV, forcing
it to slow down and stop. An additional person was placed directly behind the
camera in all three scenes (Actor 1 in Figure/4)), giving the appearance of another
rider waiting for their SAV. This was to constrain participants’ movement in the
simulation, as 360-degree video does not allow for motion when imported into
VR.

We did several tests of the SAV’s behaviour within the real urban context
and to prepare the AV for recording the scenes. At the time, the AV had been
programmed to use a combination of algorithms and a cost map that kept the
vehicle as close to the middle of the avenue as possible. Upon testing the SAV’s
behaviour when approaching a rider, we found that the SAV would move in
a straight line towards the waiting rider, which was in conflict with previous
observations that AVs should mirror the behaviour of human drivers (Schneemann
and Gohl, 2016). Through informal tests with members of the project team,
we also found the direct approach to be perceived as threatening from the
perspective of the waiting rider. Hence, we programmed the SAV to follow a
pathway that was recorded based on a human driver pulling over to the side of
the avenue following an S-curve trajectory. On top of the prerecorded trajectory,
the vehicle was operating a ‘virtual bumper’ which is a system that detects
obstacles in (or adjacent to) the proposed vehicle trajectory and reduces the
speed based on a time-to-collision calculation. Due to safety regulations, a
licensed operator had to sit in the SAV — in case of having to manually bring
the SAV to a halt. However, for the purpose of the recordings, we were able
to remove the steering wheel, thus conveying clearly to participants that the
vehicle was operating autonomously with the operator playing the role of a rider.
The eHMI light patterns were fully implemented and connected with the SAV’s
operating system and programmed to respond with the appropriate message for
each of the staged situations.

We recorded the scenes in the chosen urban context, a pedestrianised area on
our university campus which leads to the university’s main buildings. We used
an Insta360 Pro #] camera (capable of recording 360-degree panorama videos in
8K 3D). For post-processing purposes we used Adobe Premiere and Adobe After

“https: //www.insta360.com/product/insta360-pro, last accessed January 2022

14

Effects. As we recorded the scenes during dusk for better visibility of the low-res
lighting display, we had to apply the Neat Vided>| filter to reduce image noise,
while still preserving fine details, such as people’s faces. We then combined
the three scenes, added a short blend transition between them, and exported
them into a single 3D over-under video file. To experience the stereoscopic 3D
360-degree video with a VR headset (HTC Vive), we imported the video file into
Unity and applied it as a render texture on a skybox material.

4 Evaluation Study

4.1 Materials and Setup

The study took place in our VR lab space (approx. six by six metres). We
used an HTC Vive VR headset for the experiment. To convey the immersive
audio recording of the scene soundscape and increase a sense of presence, we
used stereo headphones. We further prepared a mock-up interface for a mobile
SAV ride-sharing application which showed the following information: (a) a map
of the location where the participants were supposed to wait for their vehicle,
(b) the vehicle’s current position approximately two minutes away from the
participant, (c) the colour which was assigned by the system for the participant
to recognise their vehicle (in this case purple), and (d) a mock user profile of the
other rider whom they would share the approaching SAV with.

4.2 Participants and Procedure

The study involved 14 participants (seven male, seven female). None of those
participants had been involved in the expert workshops. Ages of the participants
ranged between 21 and 55 years (M=81.42, SD=8.6). Out of our participants,
six were students and eight working professionals; three participants never
experienced VR before, eight participants had less than five experiences in
VR, and three participants more than five. We recruited participants from our
university’s mailing lists, flyers, and social networks. Taking part in the study
was entirely voluntary and initial contact had to be made by the participants,
following the study protocol approved by our university’s human research ethics

committee.

Shttps://www.neatvideo.com/, last accessed January 2022

15

After arriving in our lab, we first gave a short introduction to each par-
ticipant about our research and informed them about the study purpose of
evaluating interactions between SAVs and surrounding pedestrians (including
waiting passengers). Each participant filled out the study consent form and a
short questionnaire to collect demographic data. We then quickly briefed partici-
pants about the designed scenario of waiting for a requested SAV service. Before
commencing with the VR experience, we presented them with the mock-up
interface of the SAV ride-sharing application. The duration of the scenario in
VR was 2 minutes and 19 seconds. The duration was chosen based on previous
tests with members of the wider project team, ensuring that the scenario was
long enough for participants to be immersed in the scenario, but at the same
time short enough to avoid study fatigue. After experiencing the scenario in VR,
each participant partook in a post-scenario semi-structured interview.

Out of the 14 participants, three reported that they had experienced VR
more than five times before this study, eight reported that they had experienced
VR at least once but less than five times, and three reported that they had no
prior VR experience. Interestingly, while the majority of our participants had
previous experience in VR, none of them had experienced 360-degree videos in
VR before but only computer-generated content. One participant (P10), for
example, stated: ‘Previously, what I was used to in VR was like a game, so it
was not necessarily a realistic situation.’ Potentially as a consequence of this,

participants commended the high visual realism of the VR experience.

4.3 Data Collection and Analysis

The post-scenario semi-structured interview included questions covering three
broader areas: (a) participants’ perception and understanding of the eHMI,
(b) participants’ trust towards the vehicle, and (c) their general experience of
the SAV service, all based on the scenario which they experienced in VR. The
interview took 8 minutes 39 seconds on average (SD=3 minutes 36 seconds).
The interviews were audio-recorded for later analysis. Additionally, we also took
notes about participants’ behaviour when experiencing the VR prototype (e.g.
if participants made comments or gesticulated during the experience).

The interviews were transcribed by a professional transcription service. Two
researchers were involved in coding the transcribed interviews, following the
thematic analysis approach (Braun and Clarke, 2006). The two coders started
the coding process with a different set of interviews. Later on they used a

16

collaborative online whiteboard to look for agreement and disagreement between
their codes and to develop the final categories and overarching themes.

4.4 Results

The results are structured following the themes that we conceptualised through
the thematic analysis of the interview data. Where relevant we augment the
findings with observations recorded during the VR experience.

4.4.1 Interpretation of the eHMI

In our study, participants experienced three scenes accommodating various traffic
situations and eHMI messages. In the post-scenario interviews, when being asked
about the light patterns, participants most frequently referred back to the eHMI
light pattern L4 that would make other pedestrians aware of stepping into the
operational radius of the vehicle (n=10), and the colour encoding (i.e. purple)
that would help participants to identify their approaching vehicle (n=10). Only
one participant (P10) mentioned the eHMI light pattern of pulsing white colours
(L1) when the vehicle was just commuting through the shared space and signalling
its autonomous operation mode. P10 stated: ‘To me it was clear that that wasn’t
my car, so I sort of looked at it but I just ignored it.’ Also, participants often
did not discern between the different sequential eHMI messages (i.e. pulling
over, signalling to get on the car) when their vehicle was approaching. Five
participants (P4, P7, P9, P12) stated explicitly that they only focused on the
colour for identifying their SAV. For example, P7 said that ‘/she/ was just thinking
about matching’, and ‘didn’t interpret the light patterns as any kind of indication
of movement or intent’. Similarly, P4 stated that ‘/she/ was just looking at the
colours, [...] and wasn’t expecting any other meaning from the display’. In a
similar vein, P9 stated that ‘/he/ was just trying to concentrate on which was
[his] vehicle, and [he] didn’t look for any additional information’. Participants
who recalled the animation patterns in the interviews expressed mixed opinions.
For example, P7 stated that the sweeping animation to indicate pulling over
(L2) ‘is more intuitive [...] as it conveyed the directionality better than just the
on and off [i.e. referring to a conventional blinker]. On the other hand, P13
found the sweeping animation ‘way too abstract’, similar to P10 referring to it
as ‘fancy indicator’ and P8 who stated: ‘That’s a massive [...] change, if you’re
now saying a car’s indicator is not an indicator anymore, whereas it’s been like

that for a century’. Here, a common concern was also that the pulling over

17

animation was functionally and spatially overlaid with the light pattern that
helped participants to identify their vehicle. The majority of participants did not
make similar comments about the animated light pattern indicating participants
to enter the car (L3) or the light pattern indicating alert to pedestrians when

stepping into the AV’s operational radius (L4).

4.4.2 Colour Differentiation and Multiple Vehicles

In our prototype, we deliberately decided for two similar, yet distinguishable
colour codes for identifying the vehicle, namely blue (hex colour code: #46CCFF)
for Actor 2 and purple (#876AE8) for the VR participant. While many partici-
pants (n=10) recalled on the colour code to identify their vehicle, all but one
participants also raised that they experienced difficulties in confidently identify-
ing their vehicle based on the assigned colour. For example, P8 stated that he
‘couldn’t distinguish the major difference between those two colours’. P7 high-
lighted the limitation of using colour to encode important information in terms
of the difficulties this would create for colourblind people. Eight participants
explicitly brought up the lack of scalability. For example, P8 stated: ‘When
there are a lot of people around that have ordered something — and in the colour
spectrum, there’s not heaps of colours that you could actually put on [an eHMI),
it would be very hard to distinguish’. For example, P8 suggested ‘another unique
identifier’, such as a ‘hologram’, whereas P13 suggested a combination of ‘more
expressive light patterns’, such as ‘orange and purple [...] gently oscillat[ing]
in the windscreen, so you could pick that that was your unique ride’. This
information should be also constantly available on the rider’s personal devices,
which P7 also considered as a limitation in the presented VR experience: ‘I
think if I had the phone in my hand and I could reference the colour, that would
have probably been helpful.’ While the majority of participants (n=13) expressed
concerns regarding the colour differentiation (i.e. blue and purple) for identifying
their vehicle, only one participant (P13) expressed concerns about the abrupt
yellow light to indicate alert, suggesting that ‘it’s just all a bit too much’ in

reference to the number of different colours and animation patterns.

4.4.3. Pick-up Manoeuvre and Proximity to Rider

More than half of the participants (n=8) commented on the vehicle’s manoeuvre
when picking up the other rider (Actor 2) or themselves and on the proximity of
the vehicle towards the rider when coming to a stop. Opinions hereby varied

18

widely; for example, two participants commented that they ‘were scared’ (P2)
and ‘became really wary and alert’ (P10) when the vehicle was approaching them.
P2 further commented that ‘she was just paying attention at the [vehicle’s] sharp
movement rather [than] the colour at that point’ and that ‘a tari or a [manual]
car would move towards a kerb with a smoother movement’. While these two
participants voiced the impression that the vehicle would almost run them over, 5
other participants expressed more positive perceptions. For example, P10 stated
that the manoeuvre ‘was quite predictable’ and ‘you really feel like [the vehicle] is
slowing down as it’s approaching [and] there is no fear of the car coming at you’.
P5 even described a large gap between him and the vehicle once it had stopped:
‘[Tt] was really far away from me when it came to pick me up [...] the purple one.
So, then I wasn’t sure if it was coming to pick me up or if it was just stopping
there for some reason. It seemed like I had to walk a few steps [...] It would
have been more clear if it was closer to me at some sort of reasonable distance’.
However, he also added that he didn’t know ‘what a reasonable distance would
be’, confirming the varying statements made by participants which suggest that
an optimal proximity depends on people’s personal preference. In a similar
vein, two other participants (P3, P13) emphasised the proximity of the stopped
vehicle as the main cue to recognise their vehicle. P9 further added that this
implicit cue raises expectations towards the SAV service: ‘If you have booked
a destination in your [...] iPhone or whatever application it might be, and a
vehicle turns up directly opposite you and you get in it, you would expect that

vehicle to take you to that location.’

4.4.4 Additional Confirmation and Control

While the vehicle’s colour encoding and proximity towards the rider were con-
sidered important factors to gain confidence in identifying the correct car,
participants also stated that they would need additional confirmation for a
satisfactory customer experience with the SAV service. These comments were
mostly related to the hypothetical boarding process, which was not covered in
our scenario. For example, P7 said that while ‘the colour is really helpful from
afar and getting prepared to get into a vehicle [...] there needs to be something
a little bit more specific or unique to confirm’. P3 who failed to recognise or
correctly interpret the pulsing eHMI light pattern (L3) at the end of the last
scene asked us: ‘How do you know it’s safe to get in?’. P5 suggested a “more

9

verbal message, such as ”Ready to board”’. Relating to the safety driver in our

19

scenario, P4 commented on the need for an additional confirmation from inside
the car: Tf there wasn’t another person in the shuttle, how can you ask if — or
how can you confirm that it’s the right [vehicle]’. Two participants related the
need for additional cues also to the novelty factor of SAV services. P7 stated:
‘There’s going to be a while until I have full trust in something autonomous, so
I need to have some kind of indication that I am getting into the right place
and location’. Similarly, P9 expressed that his trust towards the SAV service
‘would be built up on the number of times it does it correctly’. While the need
for additional unidirectional cues — from the vehicle towards the rider — were
repeatedly mentioned, one participant (P7) also explicitly stated the need to
gain some control over the vehicle. When asked about her repeated hand waving
gesture while experiencing the VR prototype, P7 urged that the aspect of sensing
and responding ‘is part of this change to autonomous vehicles’ and that ‘she

would like to know, that she is influencing something’.

4.4.5 Trust and Shared Space

Regarding our scenario of SAVs commuting in shared spaces, the interviews
revealed that the majority of participants trusted the vehicle in the sense that
they considered the chance of an accident as rather low. Participants’ trust was
induced by observing the vehicle’s interactions with other pedestrians (n=9),
including implicit cues (i.e. vehicle physically slowing down), and explicit cues
(ie. awareness light pattern, L4), as well the low speed of the vehicle (n=3).
Participants P3 and P10 further referred to the slow speed and small size of the
vehicle in relation to the ‘very light pedestrian flow’. Given this constraints, P3
even mentioned that ‘/he/ would be very comfortable if it was driving a lot faster’
in the experienced context.

Interestingly, none of the participants objected the awareness light pattern
(L4) — often referred to as ‘alert’ signal — in the shared space. Instead participants
‘were] glad to see it turn a different colour’ (P7) in a potentially safety-critical
situation and the vehicle being ‘really well lit up [...] to say that "I’m here and
I see you” (P3). However, several participants urged that additional signage or
segregation would be required to ‘et pedestrians know they are sharing the space
with an autonomous vehicle, [...] because of safety reasons but also efficiency’.
P8 stated, similarly to P9, that “f you’re aware that something will always stop
for you [...], you will just consciously not worry and will just do what you want
to do’. P2 further stated that ‘there wasn’t a marked difference between the

20

roadway and where people were standing’, which made her feel standing in the
path of the vehicle. P6 stated similarly that ‘because there was no sign [...] for
the vehicle to stop, it means it can stop anywhere’, which made her ‘feel insecure’.
Instead she would expect the vehicle ‘to stop at a critical location’ in the shared

space, such as a designated pick up area.

5 Discussion

In this study, we investigated the efficacy of eHMI communication in complex
urban mobility scenarios exemplified through a ride-sharing service operating
in an urban space shared by pedestrians and vehicles. Hereafter, we discuss
the results according to the initial aims: the use of eHMIs to convey multiple
messages simultaneously, pedestrians’ perception of multiple AVs and their
eHMIs, and AV-pedestrian interactions for SAVs in a shared space.

5.1 Conveying multiple messages

The comprehensive literature review by Dey et al. (2020a) found that there are no
recommendations available at this stage regarding an eHMI’s optimal information
capacity (i.e. number of displays and number of messages), thus leaving it unclear
for designers how to avoid potential cognitive overload. Given the ride-sharing
scenario, we designed the eHMI to display information that is relevant to an
individual rider (i.e. identifying the vehicle) and the general public (i.e. status,
intent and, awareness). Furthermore, we deliberately decided to display the
information by a single display. This meant that various messages were overlaid,
namely the vehicle identifier encoded through colour with the vehicle’s states and
operations encoded through (animated) patterns. Further, given that various
traffic situations were covered, distinct messages were displayed successively
within a single display space. Participants, who experienced the scenario in
VR, reported in the post-scenario interviews that they were mostly focusing
on identifying their vehicle based on the colour encoding (n=10). Interestingly,
however, the same number of participants also noticed and recalled the light
pattern to signal awareness to other pedestrians, which they found important
given the close proximity of the inattentive pedestrian in the represented situation.
This may suggest that people filter for eHMI messages that are relevant to their
particular goals or critical in terms of safety. However, it also has to be noted that
the sudden and clear change in colour (i.e. purple to yellow) and LED position

21

(i.e. from only the bottom to all light bars lit up) was better distinguishable for
participants. We therefore conclude that conveying multiple messages through a
single low-res lighting display is possible to a certain extent, however, successful
interpretation depends on various factors, including the respective situation and
visual distinguishability of the different messages. Acknowledging the limitations
of our study setup, we argue that more targeted investigations on eHMI’s
information capacity are needed, including such that compare different number
of displays and messages, for different modalities and display types, and across
different situations.

5.2 Perception of multiple eHMI-equipped SAVs

Addressing the lack of use cases that investigate eHMI concepts beyond interac-
tions with a single AV (Dey et al., 2020a; Tran et al., 2021), we also wanted to
test out if multiple SAVs in an urban area would impede comprehension of the
eHML. Specifically to our ride-sharing scenario, findings suggest that identifying
a vehicle solely based on colour encoding has limitations when multiple SAVs
commute through an area. Here, our findings point to the necessity of using a
combination of colours or more unique light patterns; further, additional means
for identifying a vehicle, e.g. through number plates, dynamic high-resolution
displays or personal mobile devices, would improve riders’ confidence in identi-
fying their allocated SAV in high-traffic ride-sharing scenarios. However, our
findings also show that users appreciate being able to identify their vehicle from
a distance, which suggests that SAVs should adopt a combination of highly
visible ambient eHMIs and additional cues for interactions in closer proximity.
Multimodal interaction concepts, such as Uber’s light beacon in combination
with their smartphone application (Hawkins, 2016) or the additional use of
haptic feedback for AV-pedestrian interaction (Mahadevan et al., 2018), could
be further adopted to the context of SAV ride-sharing.

In terms of prototyping and evaluating the efficacy of eHMIs in complex
traffic scenarios, our approach of using 360-degree recordings has limitations
as we represented multiple vehicles by concatenating various recordings of a
single vehicle. This was also emphasised by one participant who stated that ‘the
lack of cars felt unnatural, [given it] was actually in a city like [anonymised for
review)’ (P2). Furthermore, our prototyping setup did not allow participants to
interact with the mobile SAV ride-sharing application during the VR experience.
Thus, further work is needed to enhance the capabilities of 360-degree VR

22

prototypes (Hoggenmueller and Tomitsch, 2019) for the design and evaluation of
interactions with AVs and eHMIs.

5.3 AV-pedestrian interactions in shared spaces

The majority of eHMI concepts has been designed for and evaluated in crossing
situations on roads (Dey et al., 2020a; Colley et al., 2020a), whereas our study
focused on interactions in shared spaces that are predominantly occupied by
pedestrians. Generally, our participants, who experienced the scenario in VR, did
not express any objections against sharing a pedestrianised area with autonomous
vehicles; instead, some even stated that the SAV could have moved faster
depending on the density of people. In terms of signalling awareness (L4), VR
study participants appreciated a strong visual signal. This is interesting, as
some of the participants from the expert workshops urged caution about strong
alert signals when exploring the shared space scenario within the prototyping
toolkit. Our findings also suggest aspects for further considerations, such as how
to mitigate pedestrian behaviour that would cause an AV in a shared space to
constantly come to a halt. Also, despite using eHMIs, additional information
integrated into the immediate physical surroundings might still be needed, such
as signs and road markings to indicate that an area is populated by AVs and to

allocate dedicated stopping points for SAVs within a shared space.

5.4 Additional implicit and explicit communication cues

The results from our study also confirm the importance of implicit communication
cues and, in that regard, extend previous findings (Rettenmaier et al., 2021;
Risto et al., 2017; Moore et al., 2019) to the context of ride-sharing scenarios:
indeed, more than half of our participants commented on the SAV’s approaching
manoeuvre and proximity to the rider in relation to trust and user experience.
This is an interesting finding as it points out that implicit cues, such as motion
and vehicle proximity, are not only relevant in safety-critical situations, such as
crossing decisions, but also shape the user’s experience with a service and need
to be considered in the design. One VR study participant (P9) commented in
this regard: ‘I think you can’t divorce the car displaying technology from that
whole package. It has to be looked at holistically.’ Considering the eHMI only as
one element within human-vehicle interaction design was also supported through
some of our other findings. Participants commented that for our ride-sharing

scenario additional communication channels, amongst others via personal devices

23

and interfaces inside the vehicle, but also direct influence and control over
the vehicle via sensor input is required. This highlights the need for future
work to consider more carefully interaction trajectories and how interactions
unfold involving a series of service touch points, as well as considering explicit
and implicit human-machine interactions. Instead of only focusing on what
information to communicate depending on the vehicle’s proximity to a passenger,
future frameworks should also consider the relationship of interaction modalities
and the rider’s spatial distance to the vehicle. We therefore propose to add
another overarching dimension ‘implicit information’ to the framework developed
by Owensby et al. (2018) in order to cover for the spatio-temporal vehicle
movements. This would further emphasise that designing the vehicle’s movement
should not be left alone to engineers developing algorithms as it needs to be
carefully designed to address trust and user experience towards SAV services
more holistically.

5.5 Limitations

Due to the exploratory nature of this study, the workshops and the VR evaluation
study involved relatively small numbers of participants (14 people each). There
was intentionally no overlap between the two groups of participants as having
been part of the workshop would have influenced participant’s knowledge and
expectations in the VR study. However, this may have led to some of the
contradictory observations; for example, in regards to preferences about the use
of visual light signals. It thus remains unclear whether these observed differences
stem from the background and characteristics (including participants’ age) or the
way participants assessed the scenes in the toolkit versus VR. Although we had a
mix of participants in terms of their experience with VR, our sample was too small
to identify whether and how this factor influences participants’ perception of the
SAV and its eHMI in VR. Furthermore, designing a comprehensive experience
of a ride-sharing scenario, including multiple situations and eHMI messages, and
following a design process, including several iterations and data collections, made
it at times difficult to trace back findings to specific design decisions. These
limitations point to questions that could be investigated in future studies and
more targeted eHMI evaluations (e.g. re information capacity).

24

6 Conclusion

In this paper we presented insights from our human-centred design process and
analysed participant interview data collected through a VR study involving a
ride-sharing scenario recorded as a 360-degree VR prototype. While the light
patterns we implemented were not necessarily identified as the ideal solution for
the eHMI messages that an SAV should be equipped with, our study pointed out
several suggestions for improvements, such as including cues in higher-resolution
for close-proximity interaction and avoiding overriding existing norms (e.g. in
regards to our pattern for pulling over). Importantly, beyond the specific light
pattern design, we were able to uncover insights about the role of implicit (e.g.
vehicle behaviour) and explicit (e.g. via the light pattern) cues. We found that
participants filter for explicit cues that are either relevant to their goals or to
ensuring the safety of pedestrians. Our study suggests that implicit cues, such
as the way a vehicle approaches a waiting passenger, may be equally if not more
important to ‘get right’ in order to facilitate clear communication between SAVs
and pedestrians.

Our findings also offer insights on the design process and the value of using a
staged prototyping approach. To that end, our toolkit catered for context-based
eHMI design explorations in complex mobility scenarios at an early stage of
the design process. However, design parameters beyond the eHMI (e.g. the
AV’s motion) were not captured in the toolkit representation. Recording staged
scenarios through 360-degree video and evaluating these first-person interactions
in VR yielded deeper insights about our eHMI design. We further found that
immersive VR prototypes should support participants’ use of personal devices
in VR, such as smartphones, in order to allow for an evaluation of the holistic
experience and the various service touch points of complex scenarios, such as
ride-sharing.

As physical driving behaviours seem to play a major role, not only in terms of
pedestrian safety, but also passenger’s experience with an SAV service, we further
urge for more interdisciplinary collaborations between engineering and interaction
design. We were in a unique position of having access to a real AV and working
as part of a project team that included engineers as well as designers. Having to
fully implement the light patterns and the autonomous behaviour of the SAV
forced us to face technical constraints that may be overlooked in a wizard-of-Oz
or computer-generated VR study (Tran et al., 2021). For example, the limitations
of the algorithms and cost map for creating more natural, human-like driving

25

trajectories led to further investigations in regard to the vehicle’s motion in
pick-up scenarios. As a result, the robotic engineering team is implementing
modifications to the actual path planning algorithm to imitate an S-curve pattern

to cater for more intuitive human-machine interactions.

References

Asha, A. Z., Anzum, F., Finn, P., Sharlin, E., and Costa Sousa, M. (2020).
Designing external automotive displays: Vr prototypes and analysis. In
12th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive
Vehicular Applications (New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery), AutomotiveUI ’20, 74-82. doi:10.1145/3409120.3410658

Bockle, M.-P., Brenden, A. P., Klingegard, M., Habibovic, A., and Bout, M.
(2017). Sav2p: Exploring the impact of an interface for shared automated
vehicles on pedestrians’ experience. In Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applica-
tions Adjunct (New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery),
AutomotiveUI °17, 136-140. doi:10.1145/3131726.3131765

Braun, M., Volkel, S. T., Hussmann, H., Frison, A.-K., Alt, F., and Riener, A.
(2018). Beyond transportation: How to keep users attached when they are
neither driving nor owning automated cars? In Adjunct Proceedings of the
10th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive
Vehicular Applications (New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery), AutomotiveUI 718, 175-180. doi:10.1145/3239092.3265963

Braun, V. and Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Quali-
tative Research in Psychology 3, 77-101

Chang, C.-M., Toda, K., Sakamoto, D., and Igarashi, T. (2017). Eyes on
a car: An interface design for communication between an autonomous car
and a pedestrian. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications (New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery), AutomotiveUI ’17, 65-73.
doi:10.1145/3122986.3122989

Charisi, V., Habibovic, A., Andersson, J., Li, J., and Evers, V. (2017). Children’s

views on identification and intention communication of self-driving vehicles. In

26

Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children (New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery), IDC 717, 399-404.
doi:10.1145/3078072.3084300

Colley, A., Hakkilaé, J., Forsman, M.-T., Pfleging, B., and Alt, F. (2018). Car
exterior surface displays: Exploration in a real-world context. In Proceedings
of the 7th ACM International Symposium on Pervasive Displays (New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery), PerDis ’18. doi:10.1145/
3205873.3205880

Colley, A., Hakkilaé, J., Pfleging, B., and Alt, F. (2017). A design space for
external displays on cars. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference
on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications Adjunct
(New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery), AutomotiveUI
17, 146-151. doi:10.1145/3131726.3131760

Colley, M., Mytilineos, S. C., Walch, M., Gugenheimer, J., and Rukzio, E.
(2020a). Evaluating highly automated trucks as signaling lights. In 12th Inter-
national Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular
Applications (New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery),
AutomotiveUI ’20, 111-121. doi:10.1145/3409120.3410647

Colley, M. and Rukzio, E. (2020). A design space for external communication
of autonomous vehicles. In 12th International Conference on Automotive
User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications (New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery), AutomotiveUI ’20, 212-222. doi:
10.1145 /3409120.3410646

Colley, M., Walch, M., and Rukzio, E. (2020b). Unveiling the lack of scalability
in research on external communication of autonomous vehicles. In Extended
Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery), CHI
EA 720, 1-9. doi:10.1145/3334480.3382865

de Clercq, K., Dietrich, A., Velasco, J. P. N., de Winter, J., and Happee, R.
(2019). External human-machine interfaces on automated vehicles: Effects on
pedestrian crossing decisions. Human Factors 61, 1353-1370. doi:10.1177/
0018720819836343. PMID: 30912985

27

Deb, S., Carruth, D. W., Sween, R., Strawderman, L., and Garrison, T. M. (2017).
Efficacy of virtual reality in pedestrian safety research. Applied Ergonomics
65, 449 — 460. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2017.03.007

Dey, D., Habibovic, A., Lécken, A., Wintersberger, P., Pfleging, B., Riener,
A., et al. (2020a). Taming the ehmi jungle: A classification taxonomy to
guide, compare, and assess the design principles of automated vehicles’ ex-
ternal human-machine interfaces. Transportation Research Interdisciplinary
Perspectives 7, 100174. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trip.2020.100174

Dey, D., Habibovic, A., Pfleging, B., Martens, M., and Terken, J. (2020b).
Color and animation preferences for a light band ehmi in interactions between
automated vehicles and pedestrians. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery), CHI ’20, 1-13. doi:10.1145/3313831.3376325

Dey, D., Martens, M., Eggen, B., and Terken, J. (2017). The impact of vehicle
appearance and vehicle behavior on pedestrian interaction with autonomous
vehicles. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Automotive
User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications Adjunct (New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery), AutomotiveUI ’17, 158-162.
doi:10.1145/3131726.3131750

Dey, D., Martens, M., Wang, C., Ros, F., and Terken, J. (2018). Interface
concepts for intent communication from autonomous vehicles to vulnerable
road users. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on
Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications (New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery), AutomotiveUI ’18, 82-86.
doi:10.1145/3239092.3265946

Eden, G., Nanchen, B., Ramseyer, R., and Evéquoz, F. (2017). On the road
with an autonomous passenger shuttle: Integration in public spaces. In
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery), CHI EA 717, 1569-1576. doi:10.1145/3027063.3053126

Eisma, Y., Reiff, A., Kooijman, L., Dodou, D., and de Winter, J. (2021). External
human-machine interfaces: Effects of message perspective. Transportation
Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour 78, 30-41. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2021.01.013

28

Eisma, Y. B., van Bergen, S., ter Brake, S. M., Hensen, M. T. T., Tempelaar,
W. J., and de Winter, J. C. F. (2020). External human-machine interfaces:
The effect of display location on crossing intentions and eye movements.
Information 11. doi:10.3390/info11010013

Flohr, L. A., Janetzko, D., Wallach, D. P., Scholz, S. C., and Kriiger, A. (2020).
Context-based interface prototyping and evaluation for (shared) autonomous
vehicles using a lightweight immersive video-based simulator. In Proceedings
of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery), DIS ’20, 1379-1390. doi:10.
1145 /3357236.3395468

Florentine, E., Ang, M. A., Pendleton, S. D., Andersen, H., and Ang, M. H.
(2016). Pedestrian notification methods in autonomous vehicles for multi-
class mobility-on-demand service. In Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Human Agent Interaction (New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery), HAI ’16, 387-392. doi:10.1145/2974804.2974833

Gerber, M. A., Schroeter, R., and Vehns, J. (2019). A video-based automated
driving simulator for automotive ui prototyping, ux and behaviour research. In
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces
and Interactive Vehicular Applications (New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery), AutomotiveUI ’19, 14-23. doi:10.1145/3342197.
3344533

Gluck, A., Boateng, K., Huff Jr., E. W., and Brinkley, J. (2020). Putting older
adults in the driver seat: Using user enactment to explore the design of a
shared autonomous vehicle. In 12th International Conference on Automotive
User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications (New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery), AutomotiveUI ’20, 291-300. doi:
10.1145 /3409120.3410645

[Dataset] Hawkins, A. J. (2016). Meet beacon, uber’s colorful new gadget to help
prevent those awkward car mixups. https://www.theverge.com/2016/12/
15/13956146/uber-beacon-color-device-gadget-wrong-car-mixups,

last accessed: April 2022

Hoggenmueller, M. and Tomitsch, M. (2019). Enhancing pedestrian safety
through in-situ projections: A hyperreal design approach. In Proceedings of
the 8th ACM International Symposium on Pervasive Displays (New York,

29

NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery), PerDis ’19. doi:10.1145/
3321335.3329682

Hoggenmueller, M., Tomitsch, M., and Wiethoff, A. (2018). Understanding
artefact and process challenges for designing low-res lighting displays. In
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery), CHI
18, 1-12. doi:10.1145/3173574.3173833

Hoggenmiiller, M., Tomitsch, M., Parker, C., Nguyen, T. T., Zhou, D., Worrall,
S., et al. (2020). A tangible multi-display toolkit to support the collaborative
design exploration of av-pedestrian interfaces. In 32nd Australian Confer-
ence on Human-Computer Interaction (New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery), OzCHI ’20, 25-35. doi:10.1145/3441000.3441031

Hollander, K., Colley, A., Mai, C., Hakkila, J., Alt, F., and Pfleging, B. (2019).
Investigating the influence of external car displays on pedestrians’ crossing
behavior in virtual reality. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services (New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery), MobileHCI ’19.
doi:10.1145/3338286.3340138

Hollander, K., Colley, M., Rukzio, E., and Butz, A. (2021). A taxonomy of
vulnerable road users for hci based on a systematic literature review. In
Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery), CHI
°21. doi:10.1145/3411764.3445480

Iclodean, C., Cordos, N., and Varga, B. O. (2020). Autonomous shuttle bus for
public transportation: A review. Energies 13. doi:10.3390/en13112917

Tlas, C. (2013). Electronic sensing technologies for autonomous ground vehicles:
A review. In 2013 8TH INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON ADVANCED
TOPICS IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (ATEE). 1-6. doi:10.1109/ATEE.
2013.6563528

Kellett, J., Barreto, R., Hengel, A. V. D., and Vogiatzis, N. (2019). How might
autonomous vehicles impact the city? the case of commuting to central adelaide.
Urban Policy and Research 37, 442-457. doi:10.1080/08111146.2019.1674646

30

Khamissi, S. A. A. and Pfleging, B. (2019). User expectations and implications
for designing the user experience of shared vehicles. In Proceedings of the
11th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive
Vehicular Applications: Adjunct Proceedings (New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery), AutomotiveUI ’19, 130-134. doi:10.1145/3349263.
3351913

Kim, H., Jonsdottir, A. A., Shankar, J., and Boyle, L. N. (2019). S.wing: A
shared on-demand transportation network system for children. In Proceedings
of the 11th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and
Interactive Vehicular Applications: Adjunct Proceedings (New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery), AutomotiveUI ’19, 472-474.
doi:10.1145/3349263.3349605

Levin, M. W., Kockelman, K. M., Boyles, S. D., and Li, T. (2017). A general
framework for modeling shared autonomous vehicles with dynamic network-
loading and dynamic ride-sharing application. Computers, Environment and
Urban Systems 64, 373-383. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.
2017.04.006

Li, Y., Cheng, H., Zeng, Z., Liu, H., and Sester, M. (2021). Autonomous vehicles
drive into shared spaces: ehmi design concept focusing on vulnerable road
users. CoRR abs/2104.06916

M. Faas, S., Kraus, J., Schoenhals, A., and Baumann, M. (2021). Calibrating
pedestrians’ trust in automated vehicles: Does an intent display in an external
hmi support trust calibration and safe crossing behavior? In Proceedings of
the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery), CHI ’21. doi:10.1145/
3411764.3445738

Mahadevan, K., Somanath, S., and Sharlin, E. (2018). Communicating awareness
and intent in autonomous vehicle-pedestrian interaction. In Proceedings of
the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery), CHI 718, 1-12. doi:
10.1145 /3173574.3174003

Malizia, A., Chamberlain, A., and Willcock, I. (2018). From design fiction to
design fact: Developing future user experiences with proto-tools. In Human-

31

Computer Interaction. Theories, Methods, and Human Issues, ed. M. Kurosu
(Cham: Springer International Publishing), 159-168

Matviienko, A., Rauschenberger, M., Cobus, V., Timmermann, J., Miiller, H.,
Fortmann, J., et al. (2015). Deriving design guidelines for ambient light
systems. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Mobile and
Ubiquitous Multimedia (New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery), MUM ’15, 267-277. doi:10.1145/2836041.2836069

Mayhew, P. and Alhadreti, O. (2018). Are two pairs of eyes better than one? a
comparison of concurrent think-aloud and co-participation methods in usability
testing. Journal of Usability Studies 13, 177-195

Moore, D., Currano, R., Strack, G. E., and Sirkin, D. (2019). The case for implicit
external human-machine interfaces for autonomous vehicles. In Proceedings
of the 11th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and
Interactive Vehicular Applications (New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery), AutomotiveUI 719, 295-307. doi:10.1145/3342197.
3345320

Mora, L., Wu, X., and Panori, A. (2020). Mind the gap: Developments in
autonomous driving research and the sustainability challenge. Journal of
Cleaner Production 275, 124087. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.
124087

Narayanan, S., Chaniotakis, E., and Antoniou, C. (2020). Shared autonomous
vehicle services: A comprehensive review. Transportation Research Part C:
Emerging Technologies 111, 255-293. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2019.
12.008

Nguyen, T. T., Hollander, K., Hoggenmueller, M., Parker, C., and Tomitsch, M.
(2019). Designing for projection-based communication between autonomous
vehicles and pedestrians. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications (New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery), AutomotiveUI 19,
284-294. doi:10.1145/3342197.3344543

Nielsen, J. (1994). Usability Engineering (San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc.)

32

NSW Centre for Road Safety (2015). Shared Paths: Discussion of Research
Findings and Key Safety Issues. Tech. rep., Transport for NSW

Offenhuber, D. and Seitinger, S. (2014). Over the rainbow: Information design
for low-resolution urban displays. In Proceedings of the 2nd Media Architecture
Biennale Conference: World Cities (New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery), MAB 14, 40-47. doi:10.1145/2682884.2682886

Owensby, C., Tomitsch, M., and Parker, C. (2018). A framework for designing
interactions between pedestrians and driverless cars: Insights from a ride-
sharing design study. In Proceedings of the 30th Australian Conference on
Computer-Human Interaction (New York, NY, USA: Association for Comput-
ing Machinery), OzCHI 718, 359-363. doi:10.1145/3292147.3292218

Pavone, M. (2015). Autonomous Mobility-on-Demand Systems for Future Urban
Mobility (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg). 399-416. doi:
10.1007 /978-3-662-45854-9_19

Pettersson, I. and Ju, W. (2017). Design techniques for exploring automotive
interaction in the drive towards automation. In Proceedings of the 2017 Con-
ference on Designing Interactive Systems (New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery), DIS ’17, 147-160. doi:10.1145/3064663.3064666

Rasouli, A. and Tsotsos, J. K. (2020). Autonomous vehicles that interact with
pedestrians: A survey of theory and practice. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems 21, 900-918. doi:10.1109/TITS.2019.2901817

Rettenmaier, M., Dinkel, S., and Bengler, K. (2021). Communication via
motion — suitability of automated vehicle movements to negotiate the right
of way in road bottleneck scenarios. Applied Ergonomics 95, 103438. doi:
https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103438

Risto, M., Emmenegger, C., Vinkhuyzen, E., Cefkin, M., and Hollan, J. (2017).
Human-vehicle interfaces: The power of vehicle movement gestures in human
road user coordination. 186-192. doi:10.17077 /drivingassessment.1633

Robertson, T. and Loke, L. (2009). Designing situations. In Proceedings of
the 21st Annual Conference of the Australian Computer-Human Interaction
Special Interest Group: Design: Open 24/7 (New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery), OZCHI ’09, 1-8. doi:10.1145/1738826.1738828

33

Sandhaus, H. and Hornecker, E. (2018). A woz study of feedforward information
on an ambient display in autonomous cars. In The 31st Annual ACM Sympo-
sium on User Interface Software and Technology Adjunct Proceedings (New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery), UIST ’18 Adjunct,
90-92. doi:10.1145/3266037.3266111

Schneemann, F. and Gohl, I. (2016). Analyzing driver-pedestrian interaction at
crosswalks: A contribution to autonomous driving in urban environments. In
2016 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV). 38-43. doi:10.1109/TVS.2016.
7535361

Schu8, M., Wintersberger, P., and Riener, A. (2021). Let’s share a ride into the
future: A qualitative study comparing hypothetical implementation scenarios
of automated vehicles. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems (New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery), CHI ’21. doi:10.1145/3411764.3445609

Svangren, M. K., Skov, M. B., and Kjeldskov, J. (2018). Passenger trip planning
using ride-sharing services. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery), CHI 718, 1-12. doi:10.1145/3173574.3174054

Tomitsch, M. and Hoggenmueller, M. (2020). Designing human-machine inter-
actions in the automated city: Methodologies, considerations, principles. In
Automating Cities: Robots, Drones and Urban Data in the Design, Construc-
tion, Operation and Future Impact of Smart Cities, eds. C. Ming Wang and
B. T. Wang (Springer)

Tran, T. T. M., Parker, C., and Tomitsch, M. (2021). A review of virtual reality
studies on autonomous vehicle—pedestrian interaction. IEEE Transactions on
Human-Machine Systems 51, 641-652. doi:10.1109/THMS.2021.3107517

Verma, H., Evéquoz, F., Pythoud, G., Eden, G., and Lalanne, D. (2019a). En-
gaging pedestrians in designing interactions with autonomous vehicles. In
Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems (New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery),
CHI EA 719, 1-6. doi:10.1145/3290607.3312864

Verma, H., Pythoud, G., Eden, G., Lalanne, D., and Evéquoz, F. (2019b).

Pedestrians and visual signs of intent: Towards expressive autonomous pas-

34

senger shuttles. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 3.
doi:10.1145/3351265

Wiethoff, A. and Hoggenmueller, M. (2017). Experiences deploying hybrid media
architecture in public environments. In Media Architecture: Using Information
and Media as Construction Material, eds. A. Wiethoff and H. Hussmann
(Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter). 103-122

Yap, M. D., Correia, G., and van Arem, B. (2016). Preferences of travellers
for using automated vehicles as last mile public transport of multimodal
train trips. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 94, 1-16.
doi:https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2016.09.003

Yoneda, K., Suganuma, N., Yanase, R., and Aldibaja, M. (2019). Automated driv-
ing recognition technologies for adverse weather conditions. [ATSS Research
43, 253-262. doi:https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.iatssr.2019.11.005

35
