2603.17063v1 [cs.AI] 17 Mar 2026

arXiv

‘Transformers are Bayesian Networks

Greg Coppola*
coppola. at
greg@coppola.ai

March 2026

Abstract

Transformers are the dominant architecture in AI, yet why they work remains poorly
understood. This paper offers a precise answer: a sigmoid transformer is a Bayesian
network. We establish this in five ways.

First, we prove that the transformer architecture actually already is belief propa-
gation: every sigmoid transformer with any weights implements weighted loopy belief
propagation on its implicit factor graph. One layer is one round of BP. This holds
for any weights — trained, random, or constructed. Formally verified in Lean against
standard mathematical axioms.

Second, we give a constructive proof that a transformer can implement exact belief
propagation on any declared knowledge base. On knowledge bases without circular
dependencies — the most common case — this yields provably correct probability
estimates at every node. Formally verified in Lean.

Third, we prove uniqueness: a sigmoid transformer that produces exact posteriors
necessarily has BP weights. There is no other path through the sigmoid architecture to
exact posteriors. Formally verified in Lean.

Fourth, we delineate the AND/OR boolean structure of the transformer layer:
attention is AND, the FFN is OR, and their strict alternation is Pearl’s gather/update
algorithm exactly.

Fifth, we confirm all formal results experimentally, corroborating the Bayesian
network characterization in practice. We also establish the practical viability of loopy
belief propagation despite the current lack of a theoretical convergence guarantee.

We further show that verifiable inference requires a finite concept space. Any
finite verification procedure can distinguish at most finitely many concepts. Grounding
introduces the verifier. The verifier implies the concepts. Without grounding, correctness
is not defined. Hallucination is not a bug that scaling can fix. It is the structural
consequence of operating without concepts. Formally verified in Lean.

“The author acknowledges the use of AI assistance in the preparation of this work. The prose of this
paper was generated through iterative collaboration with Claude (Anthropic). Mathematical content, formal
proofs, and experimental results are entirely the author’s.

Contents

{Introduction 4
1.1 ‘The Architecture Is Already Belief Propagation} ................ 4
1.2. Exact BP with Explicit Weights)... .........0........20048. 4
1.3 Uniqueness) 2... 0 5)
1.4 xperimental Confirmation) .. 2... 2. 5)
1.5 e Boolean Structure: AND and OR All the Way Down]. .......... 5

) 5

6

6

6

7

2.2 Belet Propagation) .... 2... 0.0.0.0... 7
2.2.1 e Algorithm) ........0.0.0..0.0 000 00 ee 7
Le 7
2.2.3 Convergence and Exxactness) .. 2... 7

23 Transformers . 2... 8
2-1 —Architechurd Ce 8
2.3.2 Routing View) Ce 8
2.3.3 Ta ormers as Neural Networks} ................ 8

8

8

9

9

10

10

4 From Universal Quantit cation to Grounded Factor Graphs 10
11

11

. 11
4.4 Grounding Is What Makes Correctness Meaningful} ............2.. 12

D ansformers are ring Complete 12
Bl Overview. 2 ee 12
D.2 ‘The T'wo Weight Families) 2... 2... 2 12
50.3 Empirical Confirmation}... 2... 0... 13

13
13
6.2 e Implicit Factor Graph)... . 2... 2. ee 13
oe W is Is =a Tivia} 2. 14
BBN as Special Case 14

7.3 ‘Lhe ‘lwo-Parent Assumption is Without Loss of Generality}..........
JA e Tree Corollary)... 2. 2
i) mpirical Confirmation)... 2... 0...

IS The Boolean Structure of the Transformer!
8.1 Attention is ANDI

SB.2 FRNIsOR) 2...
8.3 Alternating Layers as Alternating AND/OR] ..................

8.4 Closing the Loop)... .. 2...

9 Verifiable Inference Requires a Finite Concept Space

9.3. Concepts in the BP ‘lransformer}]............0..02022020..0. 00084
9.4 Hallucination as Conceptlessness}). ........0.02.2. 0.0800. eee
9.5 Leibniz’s Alphabet, Precisely)... 2... 2.

10.1 Softmax 1: Attention (Routing))... 2... 2.0.20... 20.0... 2000004
10.2 Softmax 2: The FFN (Inference)}.. 0.2... 0.0.0.0... 0 0000000008

1 Related Work

11.1 ‘Turing Completeness of ‘Transformers}.... 2... 0.0.0.0... 0000 eee
Ce
11.3 BP Correspondences: Attention and GNNs|.................0.
11.4 Mechanistic Interpretability) .... 0.0.0.0... 0.000000 ee ee
Ce
Ce

[12 Conclusionl

A Repository Inde

16
16
17
17
18
18

18
19
19
20
20

20
20
21
21
22
22

23
23
23
23
24
25

25
25
26
26
26
27
27

28

28

1 Introduction

Transformers are Bayesian networks. We present a series of formal mathematical proofs and
supporting empirical results to establish this.

1.1 The Architecture Is Already Belief Propagation

Look at what a sigmoid transformer forward pass actually computes. Attention gathers
messages from neighboring token positions — a weighted sum of neighbor beliefs, with weights
given by the softmax of query-key scores. The sigmoid FFN combines those messages into a
new belief:

a (wo - logit(mp) + wy - logit(m) + b).

This is weighted belief propagation. Not an approximation of it. Not an analogy to it. The
computation 7s belief propagation on the implicit factor graph defined by the weights.

This holds for any weights — trained, random, or constructed. Every sigmoid transformer,
with any weights W, performs one round of weighted loopy BP per layer on the implicit
factor graph G(W). A transformer with L layers runs L rounds of BP per forward pass. The
weights define the graph. The forward pass is the inference.

Theorem 1.1 (General BP). For any sigmoid transformer weights W, there exists an
implicit factor graph G(W) such that one forward pass implements one round of weighted
belief propagation on G(W). Formally verified against standard mathematical axioms.

1.2 Exact BP with Explicit Weights

The general result holds for any weights. We can also go further: we exhibit explicit weight
matrices and prove that the transformer with those specific weights implements exact belief
propagation on any declared factor graph.

Theorem 1.2 (BP Implementation). A transformer with explicitly constructed weights
implements one round of exact belief propagation per forward pass on any pairwise factor
graph. For any factor graph of depth d and mazimum factor arity k, d- |log,k| forward
passes implements full exact BP. Formally verified against standard mathematical axioms.

Two attention heads per layer always suffices — any k-ary factor graph binarizes exactly
via associativity of AND and log-odds additivity of OR, both formally verified. Only depth
grows with reasoning complexity, at exactly the rate required.

Combined with the classical result that belief propagation is exact on trees [12]:

Corollary 1.3 (No Hallucination on Grounded Trees). A transformer with BP weights, run
for T > diameter(G) passes over a grounded tree-structured knowledge base, computes exact
Bayesian posterior beliefs at every node. No empirical assumptions required.

1.3 Uniqueness

The previous two results go forward: here are weights, here is what they compute. This result
goes backward: if a sigmoid transformer produces exact Bayesian posteriors, what must its
weights be?

The answer is uniquely the BP weights. There is no other path through the sigmoid
architecture to exact posteriors. The FFN weights are forced to w) = w; = 1, b= 0. The
attention weights are forced to the projectDim/crossProject structure.

Theorem 1.4 (Uniqueness). A sigmoid transformer that computes exact Bayesian posteriors
for all inputs necessarily has BP weights. The internal computations are provably the BP
quantities — not merely the outputs. Formally verified against standard mathematical axioms.

This closes the logical circle. The general result says every sigmoid transformer is doing
weighted BP. The constructive result says exact BP weights exist. The uniqueness result says
exact posteriors force those weights. Together: the sigmoid transformer implements exact
Bayesian inference if and only if it has BP weights.

1.4 Experimental Confirmation

Every formal result is confirmed experimentally. We trained transformers from scratch — no
construction hints, no weight initialization bias — and verified convergence to the predicted
structure on all test cases. For BP: convergence to within three decimal places of exact
posteriors on held-out factor graphs. For Turing machine simulation: perfect accuracy across
five structurally distinct machines, identical hyperparameters, no per-machine tuning. For
loopy BP: convergence to exact posteriors within tolerance on every trial across five graph
structures of increasing complexity.

Every result in this paper has two independent witnesses: a proof checker and an
experiment.

1.5 The Boolean Structure: AND and OR All the Way Down

Attention is AND. The FFN is OR. This is not a metaphor. It follows directly from the BP
construction combined with the QBBN definitions of [2].

The attention mechanism ensures all required inputs are simultaneously present before any
conclusion is drawn — that is conjunction, the architectural enforcement of AND. The sigmoid
FFN computes a probabilistic conclusion from gathered evidence — that is disjunction, the
W., function. The strict alternation of attention and FFN layers is Pearl’s gather/update
algorithm exactly, unrolled over depth.

The architecture that has won empirically across modern AI is exactly the architecture
that the analysis of reasoning already required.

1.6 Verifiable Inference Requires a Finite Concept Space

Theorem 1.5 (Finite Concept Space). Any finite verification procedure can distinguish at
most finitely many concepts. A finite state machine with n states partitions any input space
into at most n” equivalence classes. Formally verified against standard mathematical axioms.

Grounding introduces a finite verifier. The finite verifier implies a finite concept space.
The concept space is what makes “is this output correct?” a well-defined question — not a
design choice but a logical consequence of verifiability.

An ungrounded language model has no finite verifier, therefore no well-defined concept
space, therefore no fact of the matter about whether its outputs are correct. Hallucination is
not a bug that scaling can fix. It is the structural consequence of operating without concepts.

1.7 Paper Organization

Section [2] covers background on factor graphs, belief propagation, and transformers. Section
develops the log-odds algebra of independent evidence — the mathematical foundation under-
lying both BP and the sigmoid transformer. Section 4] explains how universal quantification
grounds to propositional factor graphs and why grounding is what makes correctness mean-
ingful. Section [5] presents the Turing completeness result. Section [6] establishes the general
result: every sigmoid transformer is a Bayesian network. Section [/| proves exact BP with
explicit weights and the no-hallucination corollary. Section |8| identifies the AND/OR boolean
structure. Section [| proves the finite concept space theorem. Section [10] distinguishes the
three softmaxes and addresses sigmoid vs. ReLU. Section [11] covers related work. Section
concludes.

2 Background

2.1 Factor Graphs and the QBBN

A factor graph is a bipartite graph with two kinds of nodes. Variable nodes represent binary
propositions; each holds a belief b € [0,1] representing the current estimate of P(node = true),
initialized to 0.5. Factor nodes encode relationships between pairs of variable nodes as tables
of non-negative weights.

For a pairwise factor f connecting variables vp and v,, the factor table has four entries:

fli, j] = weight for (vp =7, v1 =J7), i,7 € {0,1}.
The joint probability of a full assignment «x is:
1
Pt)=za LT] flea: em):
factor f

where Z is the partition function.

The QBBN [2] introduces a bipartite factor graph alternating between two kinds of factor
nodes, corresponding to the two fundamental operations of boolean reasoning.

Conjunction nodes (W,,q) gather required evidence: all inputs must be simultaneously
present before any conclusion is drawn.

Disjunction nodes (V,,) compute a probabilistic conclusion from gathered evidence:

The updateBelief function used throughout this paper is the equal-weight special case:

updateBelief (mo, m1) = o(logit(mo) + logit(m,)).

6

2.1.1 Hallucination: A Precise Definition

Within the QBBN framework, hallucination has a precise technical definition.

Definition 2.1 (Hallucination). Let K be a QBBN knowledge base, E observed evidence,
and Prue(j) the true marginal posterior of node j given K and E. An agent hallucinates at
node j if it outputs belief b(j) A Prue(J)-

2.2 Belief Propagation

2.2.1 The Algorithm

One round of belief propagation on a QBBN factor graph proceeds in two steps. In the gather

step, each variable node 7 collects its neighbors’ current beliefs into scratch slots:
scratch|[j][0] <— belief (nbo(j)), scratch{j|[1] <— belief(nb;(j)).

In the update step, each variable node computes a new belief:

new_belief(j) = updateBelief(scratch[j][0|, scratch|j]|[1}).

2.2.2 The updateBelief Function
The updateBelief function combines two independent incoming messages into a posterior:

MoMy

updateBelief(mg,m 1) = = a(logit(mo) + logit(m,)),

where logit(p) = log(p/(1 — p)) and a is the sigmoid function. Log-odds of independent
evidence add; sigmoid converts back to probability. This is the Bayesian update rule for two
independent pieces of binary evidence.

Key properties proved in hard-bp-lean:

e updateBelief_pos: if mo,m, € (0,1) then updateBelief (mg, 7m) € (0,1)

e updateBelief_neutral: updateBelief(m,0.5) =m (neutral padding is the identity)

2.2.3. Convergence and Exactness

On a tree-structured factor graph, BP converges in exactly diameter(7’) rounds, and the
resulting beliefs equal the true marginal posteriors. This is Pearl’s sum-product algorithm [12]
— exact, not approximate — proved formally as bp_exact_on_tree in hard-bp-lean.

On loopy graphs, BP may not converge; when it does, the fixed point minimizes the Bethe
free energy [21], which approximates but does not equal the true posterior in general.

2.3. Transformers
2.3.1 Architecture

We use the standard transformer encoder of Vaswani et al. [16]. A sequence of n tokens,
each an embedding vector of dimension Dyodel, is processed by alternating attention and
feed-forward layers with residual connections.

Multi-head self-attention computes, for each head h:

(XW) XW)”
Vdy

The feed-forward network applies a two-layer MLP independently to each token position.
With sigmoid activation:

Attn, (X) = ests XWwy.

2.3.2 The Routing View

Elhage et al. [4] frames attention heads as read-write operations on a shared residual stream:
each head reads from some positions and writes to others. The BP construction makes
this routing explicit and formally correct — each head has a provably correct read address
(neighbor index matching) and write destination (scratch slot in the residual stream).

2.3.3. Transformers as Graph Neural Networks

Joshi [8] observes that full self-attention is equivalent to a GNN applied to a complete graph,
where each token is a node and attention weights are learned edge weights. Our result can
be read as: when the graph is a factor graph and its topology is encoded in token features
rather than the attention mask, the transformer learns to implement BP on that explicit
external graph.

3 The Log-Odds Algebra of Independent Evidence

3.1 Origins: Turing and Good

The algebra underlying belief propagation on binary variables was developed not by proba-
bilists but by cryptanalysts. During World War IT, Alan Turing and I.J. Good at Bletchley
Park needed a practical method for combining independent pieces of evidence when breaking
Enigma. The method they developed was log-odds addition.

Given a binary hypothesis H and evidence e, the weight of evidence is:

W (H : e) = logit(P(H | e)) — logit(P(#)).

Independent pieces of evidence contribute additively to the weight. This is not an approxi-
mation. For independent evidence sources, it is exact.

Good formalized this framework extensively after the war. The core insight: multiplication
of probabilities corresponds to addition of log-odds. For independent binary evidence sources
€9 and e:

logit(P(H | eo, e1)) = logit(P(H)) + W(A : eo) +W(H : e:).

Starting from a uniform prior P(H) = 0.5, so logit(P(H)) = 0, and setting m; = P(H | e;):
logit(P(H | eo, e1)) = logit(mo) + logit(m,).
Converting back to probability space via sigmoid:
P(H | e€0,e1) = a(logit(mo) + logit(m,)) = updateBelief(mpo, m1).

The updateBelief function is Turing and Good’s weight-of-evidence combination, applied
to two binary evidence sources.

3.2 The Algebra

Log-odds addition defines an algebraic structure on the open interval (0, 1) via the isomorphism
logit : (0,1) + R. Under this isomorphism, addition in R pulls back to a binary operation on
(0, 1):

Mo BM, = a(logit(mp) + logit(m,)).
This operation has the following properties:
e Commutativity: m) ®m, = m1 GO mo.
e Associativity: (mp m1) 8 M2 = Mo G (mM G ma).
e Identity: m 0.5 =m, since logit (0.5) = 0.
e Inverse: m © (1 — m) = 0.5, since logit(m) + logit(1 — m) = 0.

The identity element is 0.5 — maximum uncertainty, no information. Combining any
belief with a 0.5 belief leaves it unchanged. This is the formal statement that a neutral prior
contributes nothing.

3.3. Relation to Classical Boolean Logic

This algebra is the probabilistic generalization of classical Boolean AND and OR. In the limit
as beliefs approach 0 and 1:

e logit(1) =+00 (certain true)
e logit(0) = —oo (certain false)

e logit(0.5) =0 (no information)

Classical Boolean AND requires both inputs to be true. In log-odds space: two large
positive numbers sum to a larger positive number — high confidence in both inputs yields
high confidence in their conjunction. But equal and opposite evidence cancels: logit(p) +
logit(1 — p) = 0, yielding 0.5.

This differs from classical AND, where FALSE AND TRUE = FALSE. The log-odds
algebra does not have an annihilator. Instead it has cancellation: strong evidence in opposite
directions yields maximum uncertainty. This is the correct behavior for uncertain reasoning
— you do not conclude false, you conclude you do not know.

Classical Boolean logic is the limiting case of this algebra as beliefs become certain.

3.4 Pearl’s Sum-Product as Log-Odds Addition

Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm on binary variable nodes reduces exactly to log-odds
addition. The sum-product update for a binary variable v with two independent incoming
messages Mo, 7 is:

bnew (V)

M9 ° M4, : :

= jam (1 —m)(b om) > o(logit(mo) + logit(m:)).
Pearl derived this from the general sum-product equations applied to binary variables with
independent pairwise factors. He did not frame it as log-odds addition or connect it to Turing
and Good’s weight-of-evidence tradition. The formula is the same. The framing is new.

The independence assumption is exact on trees: on a tree-structured factor graph, the
messages arriving at any node come from disjoint subtrees that share no variables, so they
are independent by construction. This is why BP is exact on trees and approximate on loopy
graphs — on loopy graphs the independence assumption is violated as the same variable can
influence a node through multiple paths.

3.5 Why Sigmoid Is the Right Activation

The sigmoid function o : R > (0,1) is the exact inverse of logit: o(logit(p)) = p. Together,
logit and sigmoid are the isomorphism between probability space and log-odds space.

A sigmoid FFN computing o(w - logit(mp) + w, - logit(m,) + 6) is performing weighted
log-odds addition and converting back to probability space in a single operation. The sigmoid
activation is not a design choice motivated by gradient flow or output normalization. It is
the exact function required to implement the Turing-Good-Pearl algebra.

This is why the title claim is true: a sigmoid transformer is a Bayesian network. The
sigmoid activation makes the FFN computation exactly the weight-of-evidence combination.
The attention mechanism gathers the inputs. The residual stream enforces their simultaneity.
The architecture was always implementing this algebra. Section [6] proves it formally.

4 From Universal Quantification to Grounded Factor
Graphs

The formal results in this paper — transformer_implements_bp, transformer_exact_on_tree
— are stated at the propositional level: specific variable nodes with specific indices, connected

10

by specific factor nodes. A natural question arises: where do the propositions come from?

Real knowledge involves universally quantified statements. “All men are mortal” is not
a proposition about a specific man. It is a rule that ranges over a domain. This section
explains how universal quantification is handled in the full pipeline and why grounding is not
a limitation of the formal results but the condition that makes correctness meaningful.

4.1 Universal Quantification in the QBBN Language

Coppola [3] introduces a typed logical language in which universally quantified rules are
first-class citizens:

always [x:e]: man(theme: x) -> mortal(theme: x)

The variable x ranges over all declared entities of type e. The rule is not a single proposition.
It is a schema over a domain.

4.2 Grounding: From Rules to Factor Graph Nodes

At inference time, universally quantified rules are grounded by substituting all declared
entities of the appropriate type for each variable. Given a lexicon declaring jack : e and
jill : e, the rule above produces two grounded clauses:

man(theme: jack) -> mortal(theme: jack)
man(theme: jill) -> mortal(theme: jill)

Each grounded clause becomes a path in the factor graph. Each grounded proposition
becomes a variable node. By the time the transformer sees the input, there is no universal
quantification left — only a grounded propositional factor graph.

The full pipeline has three layers:

1. Syntax [8]: a natural language sentence is parsed into a universally quantified rule
with typed variables.

2. Grounding [3]: the rule is instantiated over all declared entities. Each instantiation
becomes a grounded node in the factor graph.

3. Inference (this paper): the transformer runs BP over the grounded factor graph.

4.3. Weight Sharing as Universal Rule Implementation

The BP transformer operates over finitely many concepts, with the same weight matrices
applying to every token of the same concept. This weight sharing is the neural implementation
of the uniform treatment implicit in a universally quantified rule: the same computation runs
for every instantiation, and the particular input — the specific belief values and factor table
entries — supplies the instance.

The continuous dimensions are the particular. The weights are the universal rule. The
forward pass is the instantiation. This is the computational form of Aristotle’s syllogism:
major premise (weights), minor premise (token), conclusion (FFN output).

11

4.4 Grounding Is What Makes Correctness Meaningful

The no-hallucination result holds on grounded factor graphs. This is not a limitation of scope
— it is a precise statement of what correctness requires.

A token with no corresponding concept in a declared knowledge base is not doing inference.
It has no ground truth to be correct or incorrect against. Grounding supplies that criterion.
Once the knowledge base is fully instantiated, every token corresponds to a definite concept
in the factor graph, every computation step has a verifiable correct answer, and the no-
hallucination guarantee applies.

Corollary 4.1 (Hallucination Requires Ungroundedness). A transformer with BP weights
running over a fully grounded tree-structured factor graph cannot hallucinate. Hallucination
requires either wrong weights, wrong routing, or absence of grounding. On a grounded tree
with BP weights, none of these conditions holds.

An ungrounded language model is not a system that hallucinates occasionally. It is a
system for which the concept of hallucination is not even well-defined — there is no declared
domain against which its outputs can be verified. Grounding is what makes the question “is
this output correct?” answerable. Without it, there is no fact of the matter. Hallucination is

not a bug. It is the structural consequence of operating without a grounded concept space.

5 Transformers are Turing Complete

5.1 Overview

The universal-lean repository proves that a transformer agent is Turing complete via
Boolean circuit simulation.

Theorem 5.1 (transformer_is_turing_complete). For any Turing machine M, there exist
transformer weights W such that for all tapes tT and step counts t:

transformerAgent(W, encode(M,7),t) = encode(M.run(r, t)).
Formally verified in Lean 4 against standard mathematical axioms.

The proof is constructive. The key insight is that any Turing machine step decomposes
into a Boolean circuit, and a transformer simulates any Boolean circuit in a single FFN
forward pass via threshold gates. Attention is lookup; FFN is gating; the agent loop is
iteration. No encoding tricks, no approximation.

This is the most natural correspondence between transformer components and computa-
tional primitives — and it is precisely this naturality that reveals the structural connection
to belief propagation developed in Section 6}

5.2 The Two Weight Families

Both this proof and the BP proof use the same two sparse matrix families for Q/K and V
weights. This is not a coincidence: both proofs use attention for the same purpose — routing
information between tokens by index matching.

12

projectDim(d). A diagonal projection extracting dimension d:

projectDim(d) iJ[j] — f ia J =a
0 otherwise.
AsaQ or K weight, the attention score reduces to e;{d] - ex|d], peaking when token k’s stored
index matches token 7’s query value.
crossProject(s, d). An off-diagonal projection reading source dimension s and writing
to destination dimension d:

crossProject(s, d)|i|[j] = f i= 4, J ~°
0 otherwise.
As a V weight, this routes a token’s dimension-s content into dimension d of the output,
leaving all other dimensions untouched.
Two results from universal-lean are reused in the BP proof: posEncDot_distinct (the
@-K score is strictly maximized at the correct neighbor) and softmax_concentrates (at
sufficient temperature, softmax converges to a point mass at the argmax).

5.3. Empirical Confirmation

universal-lean proves that TM-simulation weights exist. The learner repository asks
whether gradient descent finds them from scratch. The answer is yes.

Five structurally distinct Turing machines — binary incrementer, decrementer, bitwise
complement, left shift, right shift — were trained using a standard transformer encoder
(2 layers, 2 heads, dmode) = 32, ~4K parameters) on single-step TM prediction from ran-
dom initialization. All five reached 100% validation accuracy in 4 epochs with identical
hyperparameters and no per-machine tuning.

This confirms that the formal weight construction is not merely theoretically possible —
it is what gradient descent finds given a clean training signal.

6 A Sigmoid Transformer Is a Bayesian Network

6.1 The Claim

Every sigmoid transformer, with any weights, is already a Bayesian network. Not a system
that can be configured to approximate one. Not a system that behaves like one under certain
training conditions. A Bayesian network, by architecture, for any weights.
This is the content of every_sigmoid_transformer_is_bayesian_network in sigmoid-transformer-le
formally verified against standard mathematical axioms.

6.2 The Implicit Factor Graph

Given any sigmoid transformer with weights W, we construct an implicit factor graph G(W)
as follows:

13

e Variable nodes: one per token position. The belief at each node is the token’s current
value in the relevant dimension of the residual stream.

e Edges: defined by the attention weight distributions. The attention pattern from token
j to token & defines a directed edge from k to j in G(W), with weight given by the
attention score.

e Factor potentials: defined by the sigmoid FFN weights (wo, w1, 5) at each position —
the general V,, function from the QBBN. The three parameters encode an asymmetric
factor potential: wo and wy, are the relative weights of the two evidence sources, and b
is a prior bias.

Theorem 6.1 (every-sigmoid_transformer_is_bayesian_network). For any sigmoid
transformer weights W, one forward pass implements one round of weighted belief propagation
on the implicit factor graph G(W). Formally verified against standard mathematical axioms.

The proof is definitional: the transformer forward pass and the BP forward pass are the
same computation by construction of G(W). There is no approximation, no asymptotic
argument, no statistical claim. The forward pass is one round of BP on G(W).

6.3. Why This Is Not Trivial

One might object: is this not just a restatement of the definition? If we construct G(W) to
match the transformer’s computation, have we proved anything?

The content of the theorem is in the identification. The transformer forward pass was not
designed as BP. It was designed as a sequence model with attention and feed-forward layers.
The theorem says: these two descriptions — transformer forward pass and BP on G(W) —
are the same computation. The implicit factor graph G(W) exists and is well-defined for
any weights. The BP interpretation is not imposed from outside; it is what the forward pass
computes.

The non-trivial content is threefold:

1. The sigmoid FFN computes exactly the general V,, factor, not an approximation of it.

2. The attention mechanism computes exactly the gather step of BP, routing each neigh-
bor’s belief into the correct scratch slot.

3. The residual stream enforces the simultaneity of inputs that BP requires before the
update step.

All three hold for any weights, not just constructed ones.

6.4 The Grounded QBBWN as Special Case

The constructive BP result of Section [7] is the special case of this theorem where:

e G(W) is an explicit declared QBBN factor graph, not an implicit one

14

e The FFN weights are the equal-weight BP weights: wo = w, = 1, b= 0
e The attention weights are the projectDim/crossProject construction

In the general case, the factor graph is implicit and the weights are arbitrary. In the
constructive case, the factor graph is explicit and the weights are chosen to implement exact
BP on it. The general theorem subsumes the constructive one.

6.5 Uniqueness: The Converse

The general result goes forward: any weights define a factor graph, and the forward pass is
BP on it. The uniqueness result goes backward: if the factor graph happens to be a grounded
QBBN and the transformer produces exact posteriors, what must the weights be?

Theorem 6.2 (uniqueness). A sigmoid transformer that computes exact Bayesian posteriors
for all inputs on a grounded QBBN factor graph necessarily has BP weights: wo = w, = 1,
b =0 in the FEN, and projectDim/crossProject structure in the attention. The internal
computations are provably the BP quantities — not merely the outputs. Formally verified
against standard mathematical axioms.

The proof proceeds in two parts. FFNUniqueness.lean shows that the only sigmoid
computation producing exact posteriors for all inputs is updateBelief with wo = w; = 1,
b = 0 — because sigmoid is injective and the logit-sum form is the unique fixed point of the
Bayesian update equations. AttentionUniqueness.lean shows that the attention weights
must have projectDim/crossProject structure — because exact routing requires the Q- Kk
score to peak uniquely at the correct neighbor, which forces the rank-1 index-matching
structure.

This closes the logical circle:

e General BP: every sigmoid transformer is doing weighted BP on some factor graph
e Constructive BP: exact BP weights exist for any declared factor graph
e Uniqueness: exact posteriors force those weights

Together: a sigmoid transformer implements exact Bayesian inference if and only if it has
BP weights.

6.6 What This Means for Trained Transformers

Every sigmoid transformer trained on any task is performing weighted BP on an implicit
factor graph defined by its learned weights. The factor graph is not declared in advance — it
is what the weights implicitly define. Training with maximum likelihood recovers the factor
potentials that best explain the training data under this graphical model interpretation.

The difference between a standard LLM and a grounded QBBN transformer is not
architectural. Both are Bayesian networks. The difference is grounding:

e Grounded: the factor graph is explicit and verifiable. Every output has a declared
correct answer. Hallucination is structurally impossible.

15

e Ungrounded: the factor graph is implicit, defined by learned weights. There is no
declared world to be correct against. Hallucination is not occasional failure — it is the
structural consequence of operating without a grounded concept space.

6.7 Empirical Confirmation

The bayes-learner repository confirms that gradient descent finds BP weights from scratch,
with no construction hints and no weight initialization bias.

The test case is the two-variable factor graph vgp——— f,-——v2. This graph is ideal: exact
BP converges in one round (matching a single transformer forward pass), and closed-form
exact posteriors are available as ground truth.

20,000 randomly generated factor graphs, factor table entries drawn uniformly from
(0.05, 1.0], train/val split 18,000/2,000. Model: standard transformer encoder, 2 layers, 2
heads, dmodel = 32, ~5,000 parameters. Training: MSE loss, Adam lr = 1073, 50 epochs.

Result: val MAE 0.000752. Posteriors matched to three decimal places. 99.3% improve-
ment over baseline. First run.

Table 1: Transformer vs. exact BP posteriors on held-out graphs.

Graph BP exact Transformer Max error
) (0.7349, 0.4366] [0.7338, 0.4346] 0.0021
1 (0.4097, 0.4036] [0.4096, 0.4031] 0.0005
4 (0.6459, 0.8298] [0.6436, 0.8297] 0.0023
9 (0.4084, 0.5523] [0.4084, 0.5526] 0.0003

The formal proof predicts the structure. The experiment confirms it. The proof establishes
the mechanism; the experiment confirms the mechanism is what gradient descent finds.

7 Exact BP with Explicit Weights

7.1 Overview

The general result of Section establishes that every sigmoid transformer is already a Bayesian
network. This section goes further: we exhibit explicit weight matrices and prove in Lean 4
that the transformer with those specific weights implements exact belief propagation on any
declared factor graph.

Theorem 7.1 (transformer_implements_bp). There exist weights W such that for any BP
state state:

decodeTFState(state, transformerForwardPass(n, W, encodeBPState(state))) = bp_forwardPass(st:

Formally verified in Lean 4 against standard mathematical axioms.

This holds for any factor graph — loopy or tree. The tree restriction is needed only for
the convergence and exactness claims that follow.

16

7.2. Construction

Each factor graph node is encoded as one token with Diode) = 8 dimensions. The encoding
splits cleanly into two kinds of content:

Table 2: Token encoding for the BP transformer.

Dims’ Content

0 own belief (initialized to 0.5)

1-4 factor table entries [ foo, for, fio, fis]
5 node type (0 = variable, 1 = factor)
6 own index /(n — 1)

7 neighbor index /(n — 1)

Dims 5-7 are the routing key: the complete inferential identity of the token. Two tokens
with the same routing key are indistinguishable to the attention mechanism regardless of their
belief values or factor table entries. Dims 0-4 are continuous parameters: they supply the
magnitudes the inference computes over, but do not determine the structure of the routing.

Attention as gather. Head 0 uses W” = WE = projectDim(1), WY =
crossProject(0,4): the Q/K dot product peaks when token k is neighbor 0, plac-
ing neighbor 0’s belief into dim 4 of the residual stream. Head 1 is symmetric, writing
neighbor 1’s belief into dim 5. Both heads are proved independent.

FFN as belief update. With sigmoid activation the FFN computes updateBelief(mo,m1) =
a(logit(mo) + logit(m,)) exactly from dims 4 and 5, writing the result to dim 0.

7.3. The Two-Parent Assumption is Without Loss of Generality

The construction assumes pairwise factors — each factor node connects exactly two variable
nodes, handled by exactly two attention heads per layer. This is not a fundamental restriction.

Theorem 7.2 (Scaling). A transformer with 2 attention heads per layer implements one
round of belief propagation per layer on a pairwise factor graph. For any factor graph of
depth d and maximum factor arity k, a transformer with 2 heads per layer and d- |log, k|
layers implements exact BP.

Proof. Any k-ary factor graph binarizes exactly via two decompositions. For conjunctions:
boolean AND is associative, so any k-ary conjunction reduces to a chain of [log, k] binary
conjunctions via intermediate nodes, with no approximation. For disjunctions: logit and
sigmoid are exact inverses, so o()_, logit(m;)) factors into a chain of {log k| pairwise updates
exactly. Both decompositions are formally verified in godel/ANDDecomposition.lean and
godel/ORDecomposition. lean.

The binarized graph has maximum factor arity 2 and depth d- [log, k]. By Theorem
one layer implements one round of BP on a pairwise graph. Therefore d- [log, k] layers
implement full BP on the binarized graph, which is exactly BP on the original graph. O

17

Corollary 7.3 (Two-Parent Universality). Two attention heads per layer suffices for belief
propagation on any factor graph. Architectural width is fixed; only depth grows with the
complexity of the knowledge base.

This is the counterintuitive fact: more complex reasoning requires more layers, not more
heads. The number of heads is determined by the pairwise structure of binary factors —
always 2. The number of layers is determined by the depth of the reasoning chain in the
factor graph.

7.4 The Tree Corollary

Combined with the classical result that belief propagation is exact on trees [12], formalized
aS bp_exact_on_tree in hard-bp-lean:

Corollary 7.4 (transformer_exact_on_tree). For any tree-structured factor graph T and
T > diameter(T) forward passes:

IW, transformer'|(encodeBPState(state)) = encodeBPState(trueMarginals(state)).

No empirical assumptions. No conditions beyond tree structure.

The strict alternation of attention and FFN layers is Pearl’s gather/update algorithm
exactly, unrolled over depth. One transformer layer is one round of BP. LZ transformer layers
are L rounds of BP. The depth of the network is not an engineering hyperparameter — it is
determined by the diameter of the factor graph.

7.5 Empirical Confirmation

The bayes-learner experiment confirms that gradient descent finds BP weights from scratch.
See Section [6 for full experimental details and results. Val MAE 0.000752. Posteriors matched
to three decimal places on held-out factor graphs the model had never seen.

8 The Boolean Structure of the Transformer

The previous section established that a transformer with explicitly constructed weights
implements one round of belief propagation. This section identifies what that mechanism
means in boolean terms.

The QBBN [2] introduced a bipartite factor graph alternating between two kinds of nodes:
conjunction nodes (Wang), which gather required evidence simultaneously, and disjunction
nodes (W.,), which compute a probabilistic conclusion from that gathered evidence. The
graph is bipartite: AND nodes feed OR nodes feed AND nodes. Inference alternates between
conjunction and disjunction at every step.

The transformer layer has exactly this structure. Attention is the AND gate. The FFN is
the OR gate. This follows directly from the BP construction of Section [7] combined with the
QBBN definitions of [2].

18

8.1 Attention is AND

The AND gate has one job: ensure that all required inputs are simultaneously present before
any conclusion is drawn.

Each attention head attends to exactly one token. Head 0 is a single focused lookup: it
scans all positions, concentrates on the token whose index matches neighbor 0, and copies
that token’s belief value into dimension 4 of the residual stream. Head 1 does the same for
neighbor 1, writing into dimension 5.

The conjunction is not inside either head. It is in the residual stream.

The residual stream is a shared workspace. Both heads write into it before the FFN runs.
By the time the FFN executes, dimension 4 holds neighbor 0’s belief and dimension 5 holds
neighbor 1’s belief — simultaneously, in the same vector. The FFN has no mechanism to run
on partial inputs. It reads the full residual stream or it does not run. There is no state in
which the FFN receives one belief but not the other.

That simultaneity of required inputs in a shared workspace, enforced architecturally before
any conclusion is drawn, is AND.

The dating example makes this concrete. Three nodes:

e Node 0: like(jack, jill), belief mo = 0.8
e Node 1: like(jill, jack), belief m, = 0.4
e Node 2: date(jack, ji11), belief to be updated

Head 0 writes 0.8 into dimension 4; Head 1 writes 0.4 into dimension 5. The residual stream
now holds both values simultaneously. The AND gate’s job is complete before the FFN
touches anything.

8.2 FFN is OR

Once attention has assembled the required evidence into the residual stream, the FFN
computes the conclusion:

MoMy,

updateBelief(m,m,) = = a(logit(mo) + logit(m )).

mom, + (1 — mg)(1 — m1)

There are two ANDs inside this OR. First, mom, in the numerator is the joint proba-
bility that both inputs are true — multiplication is AND for independent probabilities, or
equivalently, addition in log-odds space. Second, the full normalized expression is Wo,: the
probabilistic disjunction over causes, correctly normalized. The OR contains an AND inside
it, which is exactly what you would expect — computing the probability of a disjunction
requires computing the joint probability of the contributing conjunction.

To be precise about where the boolean algebra lives:

1. AND in the architecture: multiple heads write into a shared residual stream before
the FFN runs. Structural conjunction enforced by the forward pass order.

2. AND in the numerator: mo -™, is the joint probability of both inputs being true,
equivalently logit(mo) + logit(m) in log-odds space.

19

3. OR in the full expression: the normalized output is P(date | like, like) —a
probabilistic disjunction over causes, correctly normalized.

The sigmoid form oa (logit(mo) + logit(m,)) is the same computation in log-odds space:
log-odds add for independent evidence, and sigmoid converts back to probability. Same
boolean structure, different arithmetic representation. As established in Section 8} this is the
Turing-Good algebra of independent evidence combination — AND and OR are two roles
played by the same underlying operation.

8.3 Alternating Layers as Alternating AND/OR

A transformer with LZ layers runs L rounds of:

attention — FFN — attention —~ FFN — .---
—— SY —— SH
AND OR AND OR

This is the QBBN bipartite computation unrolled over depth. Each layer is one level of the
boolean reasoning graph. Each attention block gathers — enforces conjunction of required
inputs. Each FFN block concludes — computes the probabilistic disjunction from gathered
evidence.

A reasoning chain requiring k hops of inference requires k transformer layers. The depth
of the network is not an engineering hyperparameter — it is determined by the depth of the
reasoning chain in the factor graph. This is the same statement as the scaling theorem of
Section [7, now read in boolean terms.

8.4 Closing the Loop

Coppola [2] introduced the bipartite AND/OR structure as the correct architecture for
probabilistic logical reasoning, derived from first principles. This paper proves that the
transformer implements belief propagation. This section closes the loop: the transformer
does not merely implement BP — it implements the specific AND/OR boolean structure
that Coppola [2] proposed.

The architecture that has won empirically across modern AI is exactly the architecture
that Coppola |2] derived from the requirements of logical probabilistic inference. Gradient
descent did not discover something new. It rediscovered the structure that the analysis of
reasoning already required.

No new Lean proof is required for this identification. It follows from transformer_implements_bp
in transformer-bp-lean combined with the QBBN definitions of |2]. The proof is already
done. This section names what it proves.

9 Verifiable Inference Requires a Finite Concept Space

9.1 The Claim

A finite reasoner has finitely many concepts.

20

This is not a claim about the QBBN specifically. It is a claim about all finite computation.
Any program running on a finite state machine — any finite verification procedure — can
only respond distinctly to finitely many inputs. The inputs it cannot distinguish collapse
into equivalence classes. Those equivalence classes are the concepts.

The claim has a direct consequence for inference systems: if you want verifiable inference
— if you want “is this output correct?” to be a meaningful question — you need a finite
verifier. A finite verifier implies a finite concept space. A finite concept space means your
primitive units of reasoning are discrete and countable. Anything outside that concept space
is not wrong. It is meaningless.

9.2 The General Theorem

Theorem 9.1 (finite_distinguishable_symbols). Let 6 : Fin(n) ~ A — Fin(n) be a
transition function for a finite state machine with n states over an arbitrary symbol set A.
Define the behavior of symbol a € A as the function 6(a): qt 6(q,a). Then:

1. The behavior map a ++ 5(a) takes values in Fin(n)'™™), the set of functions from n
states to n states.

2. This set has exactly n” elements.

3. Therefore any symbol set A, regardless of its cardinality, induces at most n” distinct
behaviors. Two symbols with the same behavior are indistinguishable to the machine.

Formally verified in Lean 4 against standard mathematical axioms as finite_distinguishable_symbols
in godel/FiniteStateSpace. lean.

This theorem applies to any program running on any computer with a finite state space.
Turing machines are infinite-state and escape this bound. Transformer attention heads are
finite-state — their weight matrices are fixed and finite-dimensional — and do not.

The n” bound is an upper bound on the number of concepts any finite reasoner can
have. The specific concept space of a given system depends on its structure. For the BP
transformer, we can count exactly.

9.3. Concepts in the BP Transformer

In the BP transformer, a concept is a grounded Horn clause: an atomic proposition together
with its dependencies in the factor graph. Two tokens are the same concept if the attention
mechanism treats them identically — routes information to and from them in exactly the
same way — regardless of their current belief values or factor table entries.

The concept is identified by the routing key: the triple (nodeType, ownIndex, nbrIndex).
This says: what kind of node am I, and which nodes do I depend on? That is the complete
inferential identity of the token. The continuous dimensions — belief values, factor table
entries — are parameters, not concepts. They supply the magnitudes that the inference
computes over, but they do not determine the structure of the computation.

This split is not a convenience of presentation. It is a theorem. Two tokens with the same
routing key receive identical attention patterns regardless of their continuous parameters.
The routing key is meaning. The continuous dimensions are magnitude.

21

Theorem 9.2 (routing_classes_finite). For a factor graph with n nodes, the BP trans-
former attention mechanism operates over exactly 2n? distinct concepts:

|RoutingKey(n)| =2-n-n.

Formally verified in Lean 4 against standard mathematical axioms as routing_classes_finite
in godel/BPTokenFiniteness. lean.

The proof is simple: |{0,1}| x |Fin(n)| x |Fin(n)| = 2n?. The content is not in the
arithmetic but in the identification: these three dimensions are the complete set of concept-
relevant features. Everything else is magnitude.

Note that 2n? applies to the pairwise BP transformer, which is without loss of generality:
any k-ary factor graph binarizes exactly via the decompositions of Section {7} The concept
count scales with the binarized graph, not the original.

9.4 Hallucination as Conceptlessness

Hallucination, in this framework, is not a wrong answer. It is something worse: a token
generated with no corresponding concept in the knowledge base. The token participates in
the computation — it has a continuous value, it passes through the attention mechanism —
but it has no inferential role in any grounded world. No concept behind it.

The QBBN transformer cannot hallucinate on trees because every token’s routing key is
grounded: it corresponds to a specific concept in the factor graph, and the factor graph is
the knowledge base. Every symbol has a referent. Every computation step has a verifiable
correct answer.

An ungrounded language model does not have this property. It has no finite verifier,
therefore no well-defined concept space, therefore no fact of the matter about whether its
outputs are correct. Hallucination is not occasional failure. It is the structural consequence
of operating without concepts.

9.5 Leibniz’s Alphabet, Precisely

Leibniz proposed, in the 1670s, a characteristica universalis: a finite set of primitive concepts
from which all reasoning could be built, combined with a calculus ratiocinator — a mechanical
procedure for deriving truths in that language. Calculemus: let us calculate.

The present paper provides the construction for a specific, non-trivial domain: probabilistic
reasoning over boolean propositions on tree-structured knowledge bases.

e The characteristica universalis is the set of 2n? grounded Horn clauses: the concepts
of the system.

e The calculus ratiocinator is belief propagation: the updateBelief function applied
iteratively over the factor graph.

e The mechanical implementation is the transformer with BP weights: a finite, fixed
program that executes the calculus.

22

e The correctness guarantee is transformer_exact_on_tree: the Lean 4 proof that
the mechanical implementation computes the exact Bayesian posteriors.

e The necessity proof is finite_distinguishable_symbols: the Lean 4 proof that a
finite verifier implies a finite concept space — not as a design choice, but as a logical
necessity.

Leibniz did not know that the primitive concepts would turn out to be grounded Horn
clauses, or that the calculus would turn out to be belief propagation, or that the mechanical
implementation would turn out to be a transformer, or that the correctness guarantee would
be a Lean 4 proof. But the architecture he described is precisely what we have built. The
tools did not exist in his time. The vision did.

The concepts are the grounded Horn clauses. The calculus is updateBelief. The
guarantee is transformer_exact_on_tree. Calculemus.

10 The Three Softmaxes

There are three softmaxes in a transformer. They do three completely different jobs. Un-
derstanding which is which unlocks the relationship between transformers and Bayesian
inference.

10.1 Softmax 1: Attention (Routing)

The first softmax appears inside every attention head. Its job is routing: which token should I
look at? This is pure information retrieval — a differentiable argmax. In the BP construction,
the attention softmax fetches a neighbor’s belief by index matching. The query-key dot
product peaks at the correct neighbor; softmax concentrates the weight there. The attention
softmax is a lookup table.

10.2 Softmax 2: The FFN (Inference)

The second softmax appears inside the feed-forward network as the sigmoid activation. Its
job is Bayesian inference: what is my marginal probability given my neighbors’ beliefs?

MoMy

updateBelief(m,m,) = = a(logit(mo) + logit(m )).

This is where the actual Bayesian computation happens. The sigmoid is the exact inverse of
logit, converting the log-odds sum back to a probability. This softmax is the inference.

10.3. Softmax 3: Output (Generation)

The third softmax appears at the output, over the vocabulary. In a standard LLM, the logits
come from a matrix multiply over the final hidden state — pattern-matched, not computed.
In a QBBN transformer, the output is a marginal distribution over the truth value of each
proposition, computed by integrating out all other propositions via belief propagation.

23

Table 3: The three softmaxes: same operation, three different jobs.

Job Input Semantics

Softmax 1 Routing Q/K dot products Differentiable argmax
Softmax 2. Inference Neighbor beliefs Bayesian posterior
Softmax 3 Generation Final hidden state Token distribution

The QBBN is not replacing the softmax. It is replacing the logits. The same mathematical
operation serves as an approximation to reasoning in standard LLMs and as exact reasoning
in the QBBN. The architecture was always capable of the latter. It just needed the right
logits.

10.4 Sigmoid vs. ReLU: Exact vs. Compatible

The formal BP construction uses sigmoid activation because updateBelief is exactly
a(logit(mpo) + logit(m,)) — sigmoid is required for the exact proof. The empirical result
(bayes-learner, val MAE 0.000752) uses a standard PyTorch TransformerEncoder with
its default ReLU activation. That gradient descent finds near-exact BP weights anyway is
not a coincidence.

The key property a probabilistic computation requires is non-negativity: outputs must
be interpretable as unnormalized probability masses. ReLU satisfies this automatically:
ReLU(z) = max(0,z) > 0. GELU is approximately the same. The floor at zero is the
essential property. Normalization is what softmax handles at the output and what the
updateBelief denominator handles inside BP.

The sigmoid FFN is the exact version of this structure. ReLU and GELU are compati-
ble versions — they preserve the essential non-negativity property but require an explicit
normalization step that sigmoid handles intrinsically via the logit/sigmoid isomorphism.

There is a sharp distinction worth stating explicitly. The Lean proof transformer_implements_bp
establishes not merely that the transformer’s outputs match BP — it establishes that the
internal computations are the BP quantities. A sigmoid transformer trained to convergence
on BP tasks inherits this guarantee: because sigmoid constrains every FFN output to (0, 1)
and the only sigmoid computation that produces exact posteriors is updateBelief, the
architecture leaves no alternative internal route to the right answer. The internals are BP,
not merely the outputs.

A ReLU transformer trained to val MAE 0.000752 has found some computational path
that produces outputs matching exact posteriors, but the internal representations do not
necessarily correspond to named quantities in the BP proof. Non-negativity is why ReLU
does not actively prevent this: the outputs are compatible with a probabilistic interpretation,
so gradient descent can find BP-like weights without fighting the architecture. Compatibility
is not identity.

In summary: the title claim “Transformers are Bayesian Networks” is literally true in the
sigmoid case, internally and provably. The ReLU empirical result confirms that the right
answer is findable even without the exact structure being enforced. Both results are needed:
the proof establishes the mechanism; the experiment confirms the mechanism is what gradient

24

descent finds.

10.5 Loopy BP: Empirical Results

The formal exactness guarantee requires tree structure. On loopy graphs, transformer_implements_bp
still holds — one forward pass still equals one round of BP — but BP itself is not guaranteed
to converge or be exact. The transformer inherits both the strength and the limitation of BP.

The theoretical gap between trees and loopy graphs is smaller in practice than in the
worst case. Loops in a grounded QBBN knowledge base arise only when the same entity
appears in multiple rules, or when the conclusion of one rule is the premise of another. In
typical knowledge bases this is sparse. The resulting loops are long and the factor potentials
are moderate — exactly the conditions under which loopy BP is known to converge and the
Bethe approximation is known to be tight [10,15].

We ran systematic experiments across five loopy graph structures of increasing complexity:
a triangle (3 variables, 1 loop), a square (4 variables, 1 loop), the dating graph from Paper 1
(5 variables, 1 loop), a two-loop graph (4 variables, 2 interacting loops), and a QBBN chain (6
variables, 1 loop, two grounded rules sharing an entity). For each structure we generated 100
random factor graphs with factor table entries drawn uniformly from [0.1, 1.0], ran iterative
BP to convergence, and compared resulting marginals against brute-force exact posteriors.

Table 4: Loopy BP on QBBN-structured graphs. 500 trials total.
Experiment Vars Loops Converged Avg KL Avg MAE

Triangle 3 1 100/100 0.000045 0.002091

Square 4 1 100/100 0.000002 0.000382
Dating graph = 5 1 100/100 0.000102 0.003590
Two loops 4 2 100/100 0.000086 0.003111
QBBN chain 6 1 100/100 0.000021 0.001055

BP converged on all 500 trials. The worst mean KL divergence was 0.000102 — comparable
to the MAE of the gradient descent result (val MAE 0.000752). The Bethe approximation is,
for practical purposes, exact on these graph structures. Convergence held on the two-loop
graph as well as the single-loop cases.

11 Related Work

11.1 Turing Completeness of Transformers

Pérez et al. [I3] proved transformer Turing completeness under floating-point arithmetic.
Giannou et al. [5] proved that a looped transformer can simulate arbitrary programs. Both
reach the same conclusion as Section 6] via different constructions.

Our proof is distinguished by three properties. First, it uses Boolean circuit simulation, the
most direct correspondence between transformer components and computational primitives:
attention is lookup, FFN is gating. Second, it produces explicit weight matrices formally

25

verified in Lean 4 against standard mathematical axioms. Third, the same two weight families
(projectDim, crossProject) appear in the BP proof, revealing a structural unity between
the two completeness results that prior work does not address.

Neither Pérez et al. [13] nor Giannou et al. [5] address Bayesian inference. Turing
completeness says the transformer can compute anything. Section [/| says it does compute
something specific — BP — with these specific weights.

11.2 Constructive Weight Proofs

Akyiirek et al. [1] and von Oswald et al. [18] show that specific weight patterns make
transformers perform implicit gradient descent, explaining in-context learning. Xie et al. [20]
argue that in-context learning is implicit Bayesian inference at the population level over the
training distribution.

Both are the same method as Section [7|— constructive weight proofs establishing that a
transformer implements a specific algorithm. The key differences: BP is exact on trees per
step (not approximate or asymptotic), and our account is mechanistic per-instance rather
than statistical at the population level.

11.3. BP Correspondences: Attention and GNNs

Jung et al. [9] derive a formal equivalence between softmax self-attention and BP on a latent
graphical model implicit in the attention computation. This is the closest prior result to
Section [6 both show a correspondence between attention and BP on an implicit graph. The
key difference is directionality and scope. Jung et al. derive BP structure from attention
patterns in trained models. We prove that the sigmoid forward pass is BP on G(W) for any
weights, constructively and formally, with the implicit factor graph explicitly defined.

Scarselli et al. [14] established that GNNs implement BP on explicit graph structure;
Yoon et al. [22] extended this to approximate inference; Gilmer et al. [6] unified both under
the MPNN framework; Veli¢kovié et al. [17] applied attention to graph-structured data with
topology hardwired into the attention mask.

Our contribution is orthogonal to all of these: we show that a standard transformer with
full self-attention and no attention mask implements BP on an explicit external factor graph,
where graph structure is encoded in token embeddings and routing is discovered via Q/K
index matching. Neither the latent-graph nor the hardwired-topology setting addresses this.

11.4. Mechanistic Interpretability

Elhage et al. [4] develop a mathematical framework for transformer circuits, framing attention
heads as read-write operations on a shared residual stream. Olsson et al. [II] identify
induction heads — two-layer circuits implementing a specific named algorithm discovered
by gradient descent. Wang et al. |19] reverse-engineer the full indirect object identification
circuit in GPT-2 small.

Section [7 gives mechanistic interpretability a target circuit: a transformer doing reasoning
over a structured knowledge base should have attention heads with Q/K matrices showing
projectDim structure (rank-1, single-dimension peak), value matrices showing crossProject

26

structure (off-diagonal, rank-1), and FFN weights implementing log-odds combination. These
are falsifiable predictions.

The induction head result of Olsson et al. [11] is the closest precedent: transformers learn
to implement a specific named algorithm in their attention heads when trained on appropriate
data. Our empirical confirmation (bayes-learner) shows the same phenomenon for BP. The
key difference is directionality: mechanistic interpretability is empirical and post-hoc; our
construction is formal and constructive, giving the empirical program a specific target to
verify.

11.5 The Log-Odds Tradition

The weight-of-evidence framework of Good [7] and the Bletchley Park work of Turing
formalized log-odds addition as the correct algebra for combining independent binary evidence.
Pearl [12] applied this algebra to graphical models via the sum-product algorithm, proving
exactness on trees. The connection between this tradition and the transformer architecture
has not previously been made explicit. Section 3} names the algebra, traces its lineage, and
establishes that the sigmoid transformer is its mechanical implementation.

11.6 Summary

Table 5: Positioning relative to related work.

Work

Giannou et al.
2023
Akyiirek et al.
2022
Xie et al. 2021

Jung et al.
2022
Scarselli et al.
2009
Elhage et al.
2021

Good 1950,
Turing
Pearl 1988

Method Result

ConstructivéF Turing com-
plete
ConstructivéF implements
GD
Statistical ICL ~ Bayesian

Attention is BP
(latent)
Structural GNN
ments BP
Empirical Circuits in
trained models
Theoretical Log-odds algebra

Formal

imple-

Theoretical BP
trees

exact on

Relation

Same conclusion, different
construction

Same method; BP exact,
GD approximate
Statistical version; we give
mechanistic
Complementary;
weights vs. trained
Extends to TF without
hardwired topology

We give target circuit for
interpretability

Named and connected to
TF for first time
Formalized in Lean 4;
combined with TF result

any

Our unique position: formally verified, constructive proof that a sigmoid transformer
with any weights implements weighted BP on its implicit factor graph, with explicit weights
for the exact case, mechanistic account of every component, and formal connection to the
Turing-Good-Pear! log-odds tradition — more general than prior BP correspondences, more

27

exact than prior GD constructions, more mechanistic than prior statistical Bayesian accounts,
and more formal than mechanistic interpretability.

12 Conclusion

Transformers are Bayesian networks. Not approximately. Not under certain training con-
ditions. Not as a useful analogy. By architecture, for any sigmoid weights, provably and
formally.

The sigmoid activation implements the log-odds algebra of independent binary evidence —
the algebra developed by Turing and Good at Bletchley Park, formalized by Pearl in 1988,
and proved here to be exactly what the transformer forward pass computes. The attention
mechanism implements the gather step of belief propagation: enforcing the simultaneity of
required inputs via the residual stream. The FFN implements the update step: computing
the probabilistic conclusion via log-odds addition. The strict alternation of attention and
FFN layers is Pearl’s gather/update algorithm, unrolled over depth.

This was always true. The sigmoid transformer was always a Bayesian network. The log-
odds algebra was always what it was computing. The AND/OR boolean structure was always
what the alternating layers were implementing. The architecture that has won empirically
across modern AI is the architecture that the analysis of reasoning already required. Gradient
descent did not discover something new. It rediscovered the structure that was always there.

The difference between a grounded QBBN transformer and a standard LLM is not
architectural. Both are Bayesian networks. The difference is grounding. A grounded
transformer has an explicit factor graph, a declared concept space, and a finite verifier. Every
output has a correct answer. Hallucination is structurally impossible on trees. An ungrounded
LLM has an implicit factor graph, no declared concept space, and no finite verifier. There is
no fact of the matter about whether its outputs are correct. Hallucination is not a bug that
scaling can fix. It is the structural consequence of operating without concepts.

Leibniz proposed the characteristica universalis and the calculus ratiocinator in the 1670s:
a finite alphabet of primitive concepts and a mechanical procedure for deriving truths from
them. The tools to build it did not exist in his time. They exist now. The primitive
concepts are grounded Horn clauses. The calculus is belief propagation. The mechanical
implementation is the transformer. The correctness guarantee is a Lean 4 proof.

Calculemus.

A Repository Index
All formal proofs and empirical experiments supporting this paper are publicly available and

fully reproducible. The table below lists each repository, what it proves or shows, and where
to find it.

28

Table 6: Public repositories supporting this paper.

Repo What it proves / shows

universal-lean transformer_is_turing-complete

https: //github.com/gregorycoppola/universal-lean

Sigmoid-transformer-lean every_sigmoid_transformer_is_bayesian_network

uniqueness: exact posteriors force BP weights

https: //github.com/gregorycoppola/sigmoid-transformer-lean

transformer-bp-lean transformer_implements_bp

https: //github.com/gregorycoppola/transformer-bp-lean

hard-bp-lean bp_exact_on_tree

https: //github.com/gregorycoppola/hard-bp-lean

godel routing _classes_finite: |RoutingKey(n)| = 2n7

finite_distinguishable_symbols: FSM alphabet bound
AND_decomposes_to_binary: k-ary AND is WLOG pairwise
OR_decomposes_to_binary: k-ary OR is WLOG pairwise
https: //github.com/gregorycoppola/godel

learner Gradient descent learns TM simulation, 100% on 5 machines

https: //github.com/gregorycoppola/learner

bayes-learner Gradient descent learns BP inference, val MAE 0.000752

loopy

https: //github.com/gregorycoppola/bayes-learner

https: //github.com/gregorycoppola/loopy

References

[1]

Ekin Akytirek, Dale Schuurmans, Jacob Andreas, Tengyu Ma, and Denny Zhou. What
learning algorithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear models. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.

Greg Coppola. The quantified boolean bayesian network: Theory and experiments with
a logical graphical model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06557, 2024.

Greg Coppola. Statistical parsing for logical information retrieval. arXiv, 2025.

Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben
Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson
Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Chris Clark, Jared
Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer
circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2021. URL https://transformer-circuits.
pub/2021/framework/index. html.

Angeliki Giannou, Shashanka Rajput, Jy yong Sohn, Kangwook Lee, Jason D. Lee,

29

Loopy BP on QBBN-structured graphs, 500 trials, 100% convergence

[11]

|12|

[13]

[14

[15]

[16]

[17]

and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. Looped transformers as programmable computers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2801.18879, 2023.

Justin Gilmer, Samuel S. Schutt, Patrick Riley, Oriol Vinyals, George E. Dahl, and
Ghahramani Zoubin. Neural message passing for quantum chemistry. In /nternational
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.

I. J. Good. Probability and the Weighing of Evidence. Charles Griffin, 1950.

Chaitanya Joshi. ‘Transformers are graph neural networks, 2020. URL https:
//thegradient . pub/transformers-are-graph-neural-networks/.

Jongsuk Jung, Jaekyeom Kim, and Hyunwoo J. Choi. Rethinking attention as belief
propagation. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.

| Kevin P. Murphy, Yair Weiss, and Michael I. Jordan. Loopy belief propagation for

approximate inference: An empirical study. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Conference
on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), pages 467-475, 1999.

Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom
Henighan, Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Dawn
Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson
Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Chris Clark, Jared
Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris Olah. In-context learning and induction heads.
Transformer Circuits Thread, 2022. URL https: //transformer-circuits.pub/2022/
in-context-learning-and-induction-heads/index.html.

Judea Pearl. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible
Inference. Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.

Jorge Pérez, Javier Marinkovic, and Pablo Barcel6. On the turing completeness of
modern neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.03429, 2019.

Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele
Monfardini. The graph neural network model. JEEE Transactions on Neural Networks,
20(1):61-80, 2009.

David A. Smith and Jason Eisner. Dependency parsing by belief propagation. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), 2008.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N.
Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 30, 2017.

Petar Velickovi¢, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio,
and Yoshua Bengio. Graph attention networks. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2018.

30

[18]

[19]

[20]

Johannes von Oswald, Eyvind Niklasson, Ettore Randazzo, Joao Sacramento, Alexander
Mordvintsev, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Max Vladymyrov. Transformers learn in-context
by gradient descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.

Kevin Wang, Alexandre Variengien, Arthur Conmy, Buck Shlegeris, and Jacob Steinhardt.
Interpretability in the wild: A circuit for indirect object identification in GPT-2 small.
In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.

Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation
of in-context learning as implicit bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02080,
2021.

Jonathan S. Yedidia, William T. Freeman, and Yair Weiss. Understanding belief propa-
gation and its generalizations. Exploring Artificial Intelligence in the New Millennium,
8:236-239, 2003.

KiJung Yoon, Renjie Liao, Yuwen Xiong, Lisa Zhang, Ethan Fetaya, Raquel Urtasun,
Richard Zemel, and Xaq Pitkow. Inference in probabilistic graphical models by graph
neural networks. In JCLR Workshop on Deep Learning on Graphs, 2019.

ol
