A FORMAL THEORY OF INDUCTIVE
INFERENCE, Part 1*!

Ray J. Solomonoff

Visiting Professor, Computer Learning Research Center

Royal Holloway, University of London
Mailing Address: P.O.B. 400404, Cambridge, Ma. 02140, U.S.A.

Information and Control, Volume 7, No. 1, Pp. 1-22, March 1964 Copyright
by Academic Press Inc.

1 SUMMARY

In Part I, four ostensibly different theoretical models of induction are presented,
in which the problem dealt with is the extrapolation of a very long sequence
of symbols—presumably containing all of the information to be used in the
induction. Almost all, if not all problems in induction can be put in this form.

Some strong heuristic arguments have been obtained for the equivalence of
the last three models. One of these models is equivalent to a Bayes formulation,
in which a priori probabilities are assigned to sequences of symbols on the basis
of the lengths of inputs to a universal Turing machine that are required to
produce the sequence of interest as output.

Though it seems likely, it is not certain whether the first of the four models
is equivalent to the other three.

Few rigorous results are presented. Informal investigations are made of the
properties of these models. There are discussions of their consistency and mean-
ingfulness, of their degree of independence of the exact nature of the Turing
machine used, and of the accuracy of their predictions in comparison to those
of other induction methods.

*This research was supported by Air Force Office of Scientific Research Contract No. AF
49(638)-376, Grant No. AF-AFOSR 62-377, and Public Health Service NIH Grant No. GM
11021-01.

TA paper given at the Conference on “Cerebral Systems and Computers” held at the
California Institute of Technology, February 8-11, 1960 was the subject of Zator Technical
Bulletin No. 138. Much of the material of Sections 3.1 to 3.4 first appeared in Zator Technical
Bulletins 138 and 139 of November 1960 and January 1961, respectively. Sections 4.1 and 4.2

are more exact presentations of Zator Technical Bulletins 140 and 141 of April 1961 and April
1962, respectively.

In Part II these models are applied to the solution of three problems—
prediction of the Bernoulli sequence, extrapolation of a certain kind of Markov
chain, and the use of phrase structure grammars for induction.

Though some approximations are used, the first of these problems is treated
must rigorously. The result is Laplace’s rule of succession.

The solution to the second problem uses less certain approximations, but
the properties of the solution that are discussed, are fairly independent of these
approximations.

The third application, using phrase structure grammars, is least exact of the
three. First a formal solution is presented. Though it appears to have certain
deficiencies, it is hoped that presentation of this admittedly inadequate model
will suggest acceptable improvements in it. This formal solution is then applied
in an approximate way to the determination of the “optimum” phrase structure
grammar for a given set of strings. The results that are obtained are plausible,
but subject to the uncertainties of the approximation used.

2 INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL DISCUS-
SION: THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM

The problem dealt with will be the extrapolation of a long sequence of symbols—
these symbols being drawn from some finite alphabet. More specifically, given a
long sequence, represented by 7’, what is the probability that it will be followed
by the subsequence represented by a? In the language of Carnap (1950), we
want c(a,7'), the degree of confirmation of the hypothesis that a will follow,
given the evidence that T has just occurred. This corresponds to Carnap’s
probability.

The author feels that all problems in inductive inference, whether they in-
volve continuous or discrete data, or both, can be expressed in the form of the
extrapolation of a long sequence of symbols. Although many examples have
been investigated to lend credence to this hypothesis, this point is not essential
to the present paper, which is limited to the problem of extrapolation of se-
quences of discrete symbols. In all cases being considered, the known sequence
of symbols is very long, and contains all of the information that is to be used in
the extrapolation.

Several methods will be presented for obtaining formal solutions to this
problem. By a formal solution is meant a mathematical equation that in some
sense expresses the probability desired as a function of the sequences involved.
It will not, in general, be practical to evaluate the probability directly from
this equation. In most cases, there is some question as to whether it is even
possible in theory to perform the indicated evaluation. In all cases, however, the
equations will suggest approximations, and the approximations that have been
investigated give predictions that seem both qualitatively and quantitatively

reasonable.

The “solutions” that are proposed involve Bayes’ Theorem. A priori prob-
abilities are assigned to strings of symbols by examining the manner in which
these strings might be produced by a universal Turing machine. Strings with
short and/or numerous “descriptions” (a “description” of a string being an in-
put to the machine that yields that string as output) are assigned high a priori
probabilities. Strings with long, and/or few descriptions are assigned small a
priori probabilities.

Four ostensibly different models of this general nature are presented in Sec-
tions 3.1, 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 respectively.

It should be noted that in these sections, no theorems or rigorous proofs are
presented.

Each of the models is described in some detail. Statements are made about
various properties of these models. In few cases have any rigorous proofs been
constructed for these statements, but in all cases, they represent the author’s
strong opinions— based for the most part on plausibility arguments and nu-
merous specific examples. The text will sometimes give these arguments and
examples.

Occasionally, the phrase, “it can be shown that,” will introduce a statement
for which either a rigorous proof or a very convincing “plausibility argument”
has been found. In such cases, the demonstration will not be presented.

These models all lead to somewhat different expressions for the probabili-
ties of various possible extrapolations of a given sequence. Although it is not
demonstrated in the present text, it can be made very plausible that the last
three methods are equivalent. Whether the first method is equivalent to the
other three is not, at the present time, certain, though the author is inclined to
think that it is.

These alternate formulations of a general theory make it easier to understand
the operation and application of the theory in a variety of types of problems.

That these kinds of models might be valid is suggested by “Occam’s razor,”
one interpretation of which is that the more “simple” or “economical” of several
hypotheses is the more likely. Turing machines are then used to explicate the
concepts of “simplicity” or “economy”—the most “simple” hypothesis being
that with the shortest “description.”

Another suggested point of support is the principle of indifference. If all
inputs to a Turing machine that are of a given fixed length, are assigned “in-
differently equal a priori” likelihoods, then the probability distribution on the
output strings is equivalent to that imposed by the third model described, i.e.,
that of Section 3.3.

Huffman coding gives a third rationale for these models. If we start out with
an ensemble of long strings of a certain type, and we know the probability of
each of these strings, then Huffman coding will enable us to code these strings,
“minimally,” so that on the average, the codes for the most probable strings are
as short as possible.

”

More briefly, given the probability distribution on the strings, Huffman tells
us how to code them minimally. The presently proposed inductive inference
methods can in a sense be regarded as an inversion of Huffman coding, in that
we first obtain the minimal code for a string, and from this code, we obtain the
probability of that string.

The question of the “validity” of these inductive inference methods is a
difficult one. In general, it is impossible to prove that any proposed inductive
inference method is “correct.” It is possible to show that one is “incorrect” by
proving it to be internally inconsistent, or showing that it gives results that are
grossly at odds with our intuitive evaluation.

The strongest evidence that we can obtain for the validity of a proposed
induction method, is that it yields results that are in accord with intuitive eval-
uations in many different kinds of situations in which we have strong intuitive
ideas,

The internal consistency and meaningfulness of the proposed methods are
discussed in the sections following 3.1.1. The author feels that the proposed
systems are consistent and meaningful, but at the present time, this feeling is
supported only by heuristic reasoning and several nonrigorous demonstrations.

Evidence for the validity of the methods is principally in the form of ap-
plications to specific problems. Some of these have been worked out in Part
II. Although the results of these applications appear to be strongly in accord
with intuitive evaluations of the problems treated, several approximations are
used in going from the basic inference methods to the final solutions. For this
reason, the “correctness” of these apparent solutions makes a rather imperfect
corroboration of the basic inference methods.

The extrapolation problems dealt with in the present paper are a Bernoulli
sequence, and two types of sequences generated by progressively more complex
formal grammars.

Success has been obtained in applying the basic methods to problems in
continuous prediction such as fitting curves to empirical data, and it is expected
that the results of this work will appear in forthcoming papers.

2.1 AN EVALUATION OF THE VALIDITY OF THE
METHODS PROPOSED

There are four types of evidence presented for the validity of the proposed
models.

First, there is the general intuitive basis, involving such things as Occam’s
razor, the principle of indifference, and the inversion of Huffman codes. This
type of evidence is of much less importance than the second kind—the appli-
cation of the methods to specific problems and comparison of the results with
intuitive evaluations. The third type is given in Section 3.4, in which it is made
plausible that for a certain “goodness” criterion, and a very large body of data,

the model is at least as good as any other that may be proposed. Any proposed
general inductive inference system must at least satisfy this condition.

The fourth type of evidence is the discussion of the consistency and mean-
ingfulness of the methods in the sections following 3.1.1.

Of most importance is the second type of evidence, which is presented in
Part II. In evaluating a method of induction, we apply it to problems in which
we have strong intuitive ideas about what the solutions are, or about certain
properties of the solutions. The degree of correlation between our intuitive
beliefs and the results obtained through the theory, will largely determine our
degree of confidence in the theory. If this correlation is high in many problems
of diverse nature in which we have strong intuitive feelings, we will begin to
trust the theory in cases in which our intuitive feelings are weaker.

The first application of the present approach is made in Section 4.1 of Part
II. Prediction of the next element of a Bernoulli sequence is shown to obtain
Laplace’s rule of succession. Though this particular result is by no means uni-
versally accepted, it is not an unreasonable one.

The second application, in Section 4.2, treats a type of sequence in which
there are certain kinds of intersymbol constraints, and the results seem to be
very reasonable.

The third application, in Section 4.3, deals with extrapolation through the
use of context-free phrase structure grammars. Little work has been done in
this field, and we have few intuitive ideas about what the results should be.
However, some of the properties of the results are investigated and are found to
be intuitively reasonable.

Another application, which is not dealt with in the present paper, is the
fitting of curves to empirical data. The results obtained thus far agree with
results obtained by classical methods.

3 SEVERAL INDUCTIVE INFERENCE SYS-
TEMS

Sections 3.1, 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 will describe in some detail four ostensibly different
systems for extrapolating a long sequence of symbols.

It has been made plausible that the last three methods are essentially the
same, but it is not certain as to whether the first one is the same as the others.

Section 3 will define more exactly the concepts “description” and “universal
machine.”

Section 3.1 describes an induction system in which an a priori probability is
assigned to a sequence on the basis of a weighted sum of all possible descriptions
of that sequence with all possible continuations of it. The weight assigned to a
description of length N is 2~". Several criticisms of this model are discussed—
among them, the meaningfulness of the formulation and the degree of depen-

dence upon just what Turing machine was used.

Section 3.2 describes a model of induction that attempts to explain in a
uniform way, all of the data that we receive from the universe around us. A
new type of universal machine, more like an ordinary digital computer is intro-
duced. It is a kind of 3-tape Turing machine, and some of its properties are
discussed. A comparison is made between the induction models being presented,
and induction that is based on the explicit formulation of scientific laws.

Section 3.3 is a model in which the a priori probability assigned to a string
is proportional to the number of descriptions that it has of a given fixed length.
This model may be viewed as a more exact formulation of “The principle of
insufficient reason.”

Section 3.4 is a model whose predictions are a weighted sum of the predictions
of all describable probability evaluation methods. The weights are assigned to
a method on the basis of both its past success and its a priori probability.

It is then made plausible that this “summation” method under certain con-
ditions, is at least as “good” as any of its component methods for a stated
“goodness” criterion.

The methods described will all use universal Turing machines or approxima-
tions to such machines to detect regularities in the known part of the sequence.
These regularities will then be used for extrapolation.

Critical in the concepts of induction considered here is the “description” of
a “corpus” or body of data with respect to a given machine.

Suppose that we have a general purpose digital computer M1, with a very
large memory. Later we shall consider Turing machines—essentially computers
having infinitely expandable memories.

Any finite string of 0’s and 1’s is an acceptable input to MM, . The output
of M (when it has an output) will be a (usually different) string of symbols,
usually in an alphabet other than the binary. If the input string S to machine
Mi, gives output string T', we shall write

M,(8)=T

Under these conditions. we shall say that “S is a description of T’ with
respect to machine M, .” M,(S) will be considered to be meaningless if M1,
never stops when it is given the input S.

Next, the concept of “universal machine” will be defined. A “universal
machine” is a subclass of universal Turing machines that can simulate any other
computing machine in a certain way.

More exactly, suppose My. is an arbitrary computing machine, and Mp, (x)
is the output of M2 , for input string x. Then if M,, is a “universal machine,”
there exists some string, a (which is a function of M, and My, , but not of 2),
such that for any string, x,

My(a ~ x) = Mo(a)

a may be viewed as the “translation instructions” from M, to Mj . Here
the notation a ~ x indicates the concatenation of string a and string z.

It is possible to devise a complete theory of inductive inference using Bayes’
Theorem, if we are able to assign an a priori probability to every conceivable
sequence of symbols. In accord with this approach. it is felt that sequences
should be given high a priori probabilities if they have short descriptions and/or
many different descriptions. The methods of Sections 3.1, 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 may
be regarded as more exact formulations of these two ideas; they give, in effect,
a relative weighting for these two aspects of the descriptions of a sequence.

In general, any regularity in a corpus may be utilized to write a shorter
description of that corpus. Remaining regularities in the descriptions can, in
turn, be used to write even shorter descriptions, etc.

The simplest example of a description that will be given is in Section 4.1.
Here, a Bernoulli sequence is described.

It is seen that any “regularities” (i.e., deviations of the relative frequencies
of various symbols from the average), result in shorter and/or more numerous
descriptions.

On a direct intuitive level, the high a priori probability assigned to a sequence
with a short description corresponds to one possible interpretation of “Occam’s
Razor.” The assignment of high a priori probabilities to sequences with many
descriptions corresponds to a feeling that if an occurrence has many possible
causes, then it is more likely.

3.1 INDUCTIVE INFERENCE SYSTEM USING ALL
POSSIBLE DESCRIPTIONS AND ALL POSSIBLE
CONTINUATIONS OF THE CORPUS

The first method to be discussed will assign a probability to any possible con-
tinuation of a known finite string of symbols.

Suppose T is a very long sequence of symbols in some known alphabet, A.

A, the “output alphabet,” contains just r different symbols.

T is the corpus that we will extrapolate, and must contain all of the infor-
mation that we want to use in the induction.

My, is a universal machine with output alphabet A, and a binary input
alphabet.

a is a finite sequence of symbols of alphabet A, and is therefore a possible
immediate continuation of sequence T. We want to find the probability of this
possible continuation.

P(a,T, M1) might be called “the probability with respect to M1, that a will
follow T.”

What we wish to call P is not of very much importance. P will be defined
by Eq.(1), and we will then investigate the properties of the quantity defined. It
will later appear that this quantity has most (if not all) of the qualities desired in

an explication of Carnap’s probability; (Carnap, 1950) and so we have chosen to
refer to P as a “probability.” The reader may find it distasteful to refer to P as
“probability” until it has been proven to have all of the necessary properties—in
which case he might for the time being mentally read “probability,” whenever
P is referred to.

Cn,k iS a sequence of n symbols in the output alphabet of the universal
machine M, . There are r different symbols, so there are r” different sequences
of this type. Cn, is the kth such sequence. & may have any value from 1 to r”.

TaCy,~, is the same as T ~ a Cy g.

(Srac,,,,)t is the ith description of TaC,,, with respect to Machine M;. The
descriptions can be made in order of length, but the exact ordering method is

not critical. N (Sp c.) is the number of bits in (Srac,, ,)é-
Qn, kh) 5

Sy yy - 6/2} (Sr aca.)
P(a,T, M,) = lim lim =U ©

e>0 n00 r”t1 00 N
Ye Via- 9/2] Orersa)s
k=1 i=1
To get some understanding of this rather complex definition we will first
consider only the numerator of the right side of Eq. (1). The denominator is a
normalization factor; without it, the equation gives something like the relative
probability of the continuation a, as compared with other possible continuations.
Next, set € to zero, and let n also equal zero. This gives the very approximate

expression
> (3) (Sra)i 6)

t=1

It becomes clear at this point that if the sequence Ta has a short description
(ie., for some i, Nis,,), is small), then expression (2) will hold a lot of weight
for that description. Furthermore, if there are many such short descriptions of
Ta, then expression (2) will be given much additional weight.

Unfortunately, it can be shown that the number of descriptions of length m
of Ta (or any other sequence) is at least proportional to 2™ for large enough
m. This causes expression 2 to diverge, and so the 1 — ¢ factor of Eq. (1) is
inserted, giving!

(3)

lim
«0

os (252)

i=1

The € — 0 limit should not be applied to the numerator alone, but to the ratio of
numerator and denominator in Eq. (1) [error noted in June 2000].

For nonzero ¢, the effect is to give negligible weight to descriptions whose
lengths are many times greater than 1/e.

In the method of Section 3.2, this convergence is obtained in a somewhat dif-
ferent manner. Another way in which Eq. (1) differs from expression (3) is that
Eq. (1) considers that the partial sequence Ta might have been the beginning
of any number of longer sequences that start with Ta. By including all possible
continuations of Ta—i.e., Cn,4, we give the sequence T’a a larger probability if it
is capable of being the beginning of a longer sequence that is of high probability.
An example is the coding of the sequence D = abcdabcdabcdabcdab which can
be dealt with using the methods of Section 4.2.

If described in a direct way, the sequence D has a rather lengthy descrip-
tion. if, however, we first define the subsequence abcd to be represented by the
intermediate symbol a, we can write D as Baaaaab, B being a subsequence
that defines a to be abcd. it is reasonably likely that the sequence D has the
continuation cdabcd ... Though the sequence Baaaaab is much shorter than
the original D, the description of the sequence Dcd is Baaaaa, which is even
shorter. The sequences like Baaaaab are to be considered as “intermediate
codes” for D. The method by which they are represented as a single positive
integer—or a sequence of 0’s and 1’s —is dealt with in Sections 4.1.1 and 4.2.2.
It will become clear that the intermediate sequence Baaaaa, has a far shorter
code than Baaaaab, since in the latter case, the symbols a and b have not been
used much in the intermediate code, and therefore are effectively represented
by relatively long expressions in the final code.

It must be stressed that while the above reasoning gives some of the reasons
for the choice of Eq. (1) as a reasonable definition of probability, these argu-
ments are meant to be heuristic only. The final decision as to whether Eq. (1)
is a good definition or not rests to a rather small extent upon the heuristic rea-
soning that gave rise to it, and almost entirely upon the results of investigations
of the properties of this definition. Investigations of this type are presented in
Part II.

The author feels that Eq. (1) is likely to be correct or almost correct, but
that the methods of working the problems of Sections 4.1 to 4.3 are more likely
to be correct than Eq.(1). If Eq. (1) is found to be meaningless, inconsistent,
or somehow gives results that are intuitively unreasonable, then Eq. (1) should
be modified in ways that do not destroy the validity of the methods used in
Sections 4.1 to 4.3.

3.1.1 Criticisms and Questions About Eq. (1)

There are several questions that immediately come to mind when equation 1 is
proposed as an explication of probability.

3.1.1.1. The terms of the summation do not include descriptions that are
“meaningless,” i.e., inputs to the universal machine M,, for which the machine
does not stop. Turing (1937) has shown that it is impossible to devise a Turing

machine that will always be able to tell, in a finite time, whether an arbitrary
string will be “meaningful” for another particular universal Turing machine.
This raises the question of whether the right side of Eq. (1) defines anything at
all.

3.1.1.2. It has not been shown rigorously that the limit of the right side of
Eq. (1) exists, as €, n, and i approach their respective limits.

3.1.1.3. It would seem that the value of P(a,T, M1) would be critically
dependent upon just what universal machine, M1, was used. Is there any par-
ticular MM, that we can use that is better than any other?

3.1.2 Replies to Criticisms of Eq. (1)

3.1.2.1. It is clear that many of the individual terms of Eq. (1) are not “ef-
fectively computable” in the sense of Turing (1937). It is very reasonable to
conjecture that the entire right side of Eq. (1) is not “effectively computable.”
This does not mean, however, that we cannot use Eq (1) as the heuristic basis
of various approximations. If an approximation to Eq. (1) is found that yields
intuitively reasonable probability values and is effectively computable, we would
probably adopt such an approximation as a better explication of probability;
than Eq. (1).

One approach to such an approximation can be made by first considering
as “meaningful” input to the universal machine, only those that complete their
output in less than 7 operations. With such a limitation, each of the terms of
Eq. (1) is “effectively computable.” The summations on i and k both become
finite summations. If we let 7 approach infinity and then let € approach zero we
will have some sort of approximation to Eq. (1).

At the present rudimentary state of development of the theory, different
approximations to Eq. (1) are used for different types of problems. It is hoped
that further work in this field may yield a unified, useful approximation to Eq.
(1).

3.1.2.2. Though the existence of the limits designated on the right side of
Eq. (1) has not yet been proved, various approximations to this equation have
been made which tacitly assume the existence of these limits. Some of these
approximations are described in Sections 4.1 to 4.3.

3.1.2.3. it is likely that Eq. (1) is fairly independent of just what universal
machine is used, if T' is sufficiently long, and contains enough redundance, and
M, is “fairly good” at expressing the regularities of T. Although a proof is
not available, an outline of the heuristic reasoning behind this statement will
give clues as to the meanings of the terms used and the degree of validity to
be expected of the statement itself. Suppose we have a very long sequence T’,
containing m symbols, and we have two universal machines, MM, and Mz). We
will try to show that

P(a,T, My) & P(a,T, M2) (4)

10

Let N(sz,1) and N(s;,2) represent the lengths of the shortest codes for T, with
respect to M, and Mz respectively.

Let a, be Mo’s simulation instructions for M1.

Let ag be M,’s simulation instructions for M5

Then for all strings, z,

M(x) = Mp(ay _™ x)
and
M(x) = My (ay _™ x)

Let Na, and Ng, be the number of bits in a, and a2 respectively. Then

Nis) S< N(sz,2) + Nas (5)

and

N(S7,2) < N(Sp1) + Noa (6)

To explain Eq. (5), note that M, can always code anything by using M>’s
code, prefixed by az. Thus M;’s shortest code cannot be more than Na, longer
than My4’s shortest code for the same sequence. A similar argument holds for

Suppose that MM, is basically more efficient in coding T. Then if m, the
number of symbols in T, is sufficiently large, it is plausible to hypothesize that
Mz,’s shortest code will indeed be obtained by simulating M, and using M,’s
shortest code. It is necessary to assume that m is very large, because any slight
advantage between M,’s and M2’s coding methods is accentuated in coding a
long sequence. One might suppose that for values of m that are not too large,
the difference between the code lengths are roughly proportional tom. When m
becomes large enough so that the difference is about Ng, , then the difference
remains constant, because M2, is forming its minimal code by simulating My

If M.’s shortest codes are all N., bits longer than M,’s shortest codes, it
is clear that the largest terms of P(a,T, M1) in Eq. (1) (ie., the terms due to
the shortest codes) will all be 2%=1 times as large as the corresponding terms
in a corresponding expression for P(a,T, M2) . Since these terms occur in both
numerator and denominator, this factor will approximately cancel out with the
result that P(a,T, M1) and P(a,T, M2) are approximately equal.

Though the weak points in the above heuristic arguments are many, the
reasoning is strong to the extent that

1. M;, is appreciably more efficient than M2, in coding regularities of the
type that occur in T.

2. Mo is “close” to M, in the sense that Nj, is “small”.

3. m is sufficiently large so that M4,’s shortest code for T is much longer
than Na,.

11

In using P(a,T, M1) it would seem best to select an M, that is fairly efficient
in coding the sequences in which we will be interested. The LISP list processing
language in which recursive definitions are easily implemented, or any of the
other computer languages that have been devised for convenience in dealing
with material in certain large areas of science (Green, 1961) might be used as
the basis of simulation of M1.

3.1.3 A Method of Applying Eq. (1)

In many situations in which induction is to be applied, the sequence T' is not
constant, but grows in time. The problem is to make many inferences at different
times, each based upon the entire sequence up to that time. Instead of having
to recode the entire sequence each time to obtain the desired inference, it is
possible to summarize the previous work by modifying the machine M, suitably
and concern one’s self only with the coding of the new data. More exactly,
suppose that T is our original sequence, and we have made some inferences
based on T alone. Later, we are given the subsequence D, which is part of the
continuation of JT’, and are asked to make inferences based on T ~ D. Then
there always exists a universal machine, M2, such that

P(a,T ~ D, My) = P(a, D, M2)

for any conceivable subsequence a. In general, the nature of Mz will depend
upon both T and M, Mp2 can be viewed as a summary of the inductive data of
T, with respect to My,

Though it has been possible to prove that at least one Mz exists satisfying
the requirements described, the M2 thereby obtained makes the problem of
finding short codes for D ~ a just as difficult as the problem of finding short
codes for T ~ D —~a. It is clear that the M2 obtained in this way does not
summarize, in any useful way, the information contained in the sequence T. It
is felt, however, that if suitable approximations to Eq. (1) are used, it is indeed
possible to have Mz summarize in a useful manner the information contained
in T. A trivial example occurs if the only regularity in T is contained in the
frequencies of its various symbols. If M2 contains a listing of the number of
occurrences of each of the symbols of T’, it will then contain a summary of T in
a form that is adequate for most additions of new data on the continuation of
T.

It is possible, however, that data that seems to summarize the regularities of
T, does not do so, in view of new data. For example, if we had “summarized”
T by the frequencies of its various symbols, we would not be able to notice the
exact repetition of the entire sequence T, if it occurred later.

12

3.2 SYSTEM IN THE FORM OF A MODEL TO AC-
COUNT FOR ALL REGULARITIES IN THE OB-
SERVED UNIVERSE

Suppose that all of the sensory observations of a human being since his birth
were coded in some sort of uniform digital notation and written down as a
long sequence of symbols. Then, a model that accounts in an optimum manner
for the creation of this string, including the interaction of the man with his
environment, can be formed by supposing that the string was created as the
output of a universal machine of random input.

Here “random input” means that the input sequence is a Markov chain with
the probability of each symbol being a function of any previous symbols in the
finite past. The input alphabet may be any finite alphabet.

In the simplest case, the input will be a binary sequence with equal proba-
bilities for zero and one. This situation appears, at first glance, to be identical
to Eq. (1), with this equation being used for Bayes’ inference, given equal a
priori probabilities to all possible input sequences of the same length.

There is, however, an important difference in that the present case deals
with infinitely long inputs, while Eq. (1) deals with finite inputs only. The
meaningfulness of “a legal output” of the machine with infinitely long inputs
must then be defined. In Eq. (1), any finite input leading to a nonterminating
output is effectively given a priori probability zero. For an infinitely long input,
however, the output is often nonterminating.

In the present case, we shall regard an output as “meaningful” if every
symbol of the output takes only a finite number of operations to compute it. It
is easiest to give this a more rigorous meaning in machines that have separate
tapes for infinite input, infinite output and infinitely expandable memory. In
such a 3-tape machine we can stipulate that an output symbol, once written,
can never be erased, and so we need ask that for each output symbol not more
than a finite time elapse before that symbol is written.

There appears to be a difference between the present method and that of
Section 3.1, in that the present method only considers part of the future of the
sequence to be extrapolated—it does not consider its extension into the infinite
future, as does Section 3.1.

To compare the method of the present section with that of Eq. (1), first
consider the following definitions, which are to be used in the present section
only.

Mg is a 3-tape machine with unidirectional output and input tapes.

T is a possible output sequence containing just m symbols.

S is a possible input sequence.

Then we shall say that “S is a code of T (with respect to M2),” if the
subsequence composed of the first m symbols of M2(S) is identical to T.

We shall say that “S is a minimal code of T” if (a) S is a code of T and
(b) if the last symbol of S is removed then the resultant sentence is no longer a

13

code of T.

Since every minimal code of T is directly representable as a positive integer,
these minimal codes can be linearly ordered.

Let N(T,i) be the number of bits in the ith minimal code of T.

Then using the model previously described in the present section, and a
simple application of Bayes’ theorem, it is found that the probability that the
sequence T' will be followed by the subsequence a, is

foe)

9-N(La,i)
1

P'(a,T, M2) = = (7)
s- 9-N(T, i)
i=1

The apparent simplicity of Eq. (7) over Eq. (1) is due to two factors: first,
Eq. (7) has a very simple automatic device for considering possible continuations
of Ta. This device is built into the definition of the “minimal codes of Ta.”
Second, there are no problems of convergence, since the sums of both numerator
or denominator are bounded by unity. This makes the 1 — € factor of Eq. (1)
unnecessary.

It should be noted that My, of Eq. (7) is somewhat different from M, of Eq.
(1). If T = M2(S) then if we adjoin more symbols to the right of S, as S ~ a,
then S ~ a will still be “a code of T,” and M2(S — a) will consist of the string
T ~ b, where 0 is a finite, infinite or null string.

This condition is not true of M,, which is an unconstrained universal ma-
chine. If 14,(S) = T, then little, if anything, can be said about Mi(S — a).
M,(S ~ a) could be longer or shorter than T; it may even be the null sequence.
These properties of MM, make it difficult to define “a minimal code of T (with
respect to M;),” in the sense that it was defined for M2.

At the beginning of the present section, it was mentioned that the present
model would account for the sequence of interest, in “an optimum manner.”

By “optimum manner” it is meant that the model we are discussing is at
least as good as any other model of the universe in accounting for the sequence
in question. Other models may devise mechanistic explanations of the sequence
in terms of the known laws of science, or they may devise empirical mechanisms
that optimally approximate the behavior and observations of the man within
certain limits. Most of the models that we use to explain the universe around
us are based upon laws and informal stochastic relations that are the result
of induction using much data that we or others have observed. The induction
methods used in the present paper are meant to bypass the explicit formula-
tion of scientific laws, and use the data of the past directly to make inductive
inferences about specific future events.

It should be noted, then, that if the present model of the universe is to
compete with other models of the universe that use scientific laws, then the

14

sequence used in the present model must contain enough data of the sort that
gave rise to the induction of these scientific laws.

The laws of science that have been discovered can be viewed as summaries
of large amounts of empirical data about the universe. In the present context,
each such law can be transformed into a method of compactly coding the em-
pirical data that gave rise to that law. Instead of including the raw data in our
induction sequence, it is possible, using a suitable formalism, to write the laws
based on this data into the sequence and obtain similar results in induction.
Using the raw data will, however, give predictions that are at least as good,
and usually better, than using the summaries of the data. This is because these
summaries of the data are almost always imperfect and lose much information
through this imperfection.

It may, at this point, seem gratuitous to claim that the proposed model
is optimum with respect to all other conceivable models, many of which have
not yet been discovered. It would seem to be impossible to compare the present
model with the undiscovered models of the future, and thus claim optimality. We
will, however, give in Section 3.4 a model of induction, apparently equivalent to
the present one, in which all possible induction models are formally considered.
The predictions of each possible induction model are used in a weighted sum to
obtain predictions that are at least as “good” (in a certain stated sense) as any
of the component induction models.

3.2.1 The concept of stochastic languages (Solomonoff, 1959) suggests an-
other way of looking at the induction model of Section 3.2. A stochastic language
is an assignment of probability values to all finite strings of some finite alphabet.
Though a specific type of stochastic language is dealt with in Section 4.3, we
can characterize the most general possible stochastic language through the use
of a 3-tape universal machine, with binary input, and an output in the alphabet
of the desired language.

Let D be an arbitrary finite binary sequence, let M1 be such a 3-tape uni-
versal machine, and let R; be a random infinite binary sequence, with equal
probability for zero or one.

M,(D ~ R;) will define a probability distribution on all possible output
strings. This distribution will then constitute a stochastic language. The string
D, can be considered to be a description of this language with respect to M,

The independence of the induction methods of the present paper upon the
exact nature of the Turing machine used can be put in a particularly compact
form using the concept. If [a,;] is the set of “translation instructions” from
My, to all other possible universal machines, M,;, then we may say that the
stochastic language defined by M (a; ~ R;) is fairly independent of a; for very
long sentences, and for a; within a rather large class.

15

3.3 SYSTEM USING A UNIVERSAL MACHINE WITH
ALL POSSIBLE INPUT STRINGS OF A FIXED LENGTH

Consider a very long string T, of m symbols drawn from an alphabet of r differ-

ent symbols. We shall first obtain a method for assigning apriori probabilities

to all strings longer than TJ’. On this basis we can use Bayes’ theorem to obtain

a probability distribution for various possible continuations of T. As before,

it is desirable that J contain much redundance, and that it contain all of the

information that we expect to use, either directly or indirectly, in our induction.
Choose some large number, R, such that

22 > rm (8)

In this way, binary strings of length R can be expected to contain more
“information” than the string T. In the following development, we shall allow
R to approach infinity.

Suppose WM to be a universal machine with binary input alphabet, and an
output alphabet that is the same as that of 7. We shall consider M to be
either of the ordinary type, M1, described in Section 3.1, or the 3-tape type,
Mz, described in Section 3.2. In the present case, it has been proved that these
two machine types give equivalent results.

Consider all binary strings of length R. Say Nr of them are meaningful
inputs to M—i.e., they cause M to stop eventually. Of these Nr meaningful
inputs to M, say Nr of them result in outputs whose first m symbols are,
respectively, identical to the m symbols of T. Then the a priori probability
assigned to T' will be

Nr/Nr (9)

This ratio will become more exact as R approaches infinity, but will usually
be good enough if R satisfies Eq. (8).

It can be proved that the present inductive inference model is identical to
that of Section 3.2, if M is a machine of either type Mj, or of type Mo.

Although it has not been rigorously proved, it seems likely, at the present
time, that the methods of the present section give results identical to those of
Section 3.1.

An equation that follows from Eq. (9) that is, however, similar to Eq. (1),
is

n

EES [Ae] Ore
, 2
P"(a,T, My) = lim St _________ 0°)
€40 00 r™tt o9 E YM Sreno
2

n=1 k=1 i=1

A corresponding expression for the probability that the subsequence a (rather
than any other subsequence) will follow T, that is based on Eq. (9), is

mw — 1

Nra ($4) _ jj Nra

2( Te = lim —2%

Nr Ro00 Nr

The formulation of the induction system as a universal machine with input

strings of fixed length has an interesting interpretation in terms of “the principle

of insufficient reason.” If we consider the input sequence to be the “cause” of

the observed output sequence, and we consider all input sequences of a given

length to be equiprobable (since we have no a priori reason to prefer one rather
than any other) then we obtain the present model of induction.

(11)

3.4 A SYSTEM EMPLOYING ALL POSSIBLE PROB-
ABILITY EVALUATION METHODS

An inductive inference system will be described that makes probability evalua-
tions by using a weighted mean of the evaluations given by all possible probabil-
ity evaluation methods. The weight given to any particular evaluation method
depends upon two factors. The first factor is the success that method would
have had in predicting the now known sequence. The second is the a priori prob-
ability of that probability evaluation method. it is approximately measured by
the minimum number of bits required to describe that method.

3.4.1 A More Detailed Description of the System

Consider the extrapolation of a long string, T, containing m symbols, drawn
from an alphabet, A, containing r different symbols, 6;(¢ = 1,2,---,r).

A “probability evaluation method” (which we will henceforth designate as
“a PEM”) is a method of assigning a priori probability values to any sequence
of symbols in A. From these probability assignments it is then possible, using
Bayes’ theorem, to find the probability of any specified continuation of a known
sequence.

A normalized PEM (which we will henceforth designate as a “NPEM”) is one
in which the sum of the probabilities of all possible continuations of a sequence
is equal to the probability of that sequence. More exactly, let P,(B) be the a
priori probability assigned to string B by a certain PEM, Q;.

If, for all strings, a,

S° Pi(a ~ b;) = Pi(a)
j=1

and

17

then Q; is a NPEM.
To compute with respect to Q; the probability that string T will have the
continuation a, we can use Bayes’ theorem to obtain the value

P,(T)

If Q; is a NPEM, we shall define D;, to be “a binary description of Q;, with
respect to machine M2,” if for all strings, a, Mj(D; ~ A ~ a) is an infinite
string giving the binary expansion of P;(a). The symbols of D; are to be drawn
from a binary alphabet, and A is a special symbol that is used to tell M2 where
D, ends and a begins.

In order that it be meaningful for M2 to have an infinite output sequence,
we will specify that M2 be a 3-tape universal machine of the type that was
discussed in Section 3.2.

Consider all binary strings of length R. For a given large value of R, a
certain fraction of these strings will be binary descriptions with respect to Mo,
of the NPEM, Q;. We will assume (and this assumption can be made plausible)
that this fraction approaches a limit, f;, as R approaches infinity. The inductive
inference system that shall be proposed is

a1 SiPi(T A
PMT, Me) = SSE

Here, the summations in numerator and denominator range over all possible
NPEM’s, Qi.

Though it is not difficult to show that P’” defines a NPEM, this NPEM is
not “effectively computable” in the sense of Turing (1937) and so it does not
include itself in the summation of equation 13.

(12)

(13)

3.4.2 A Comparison of the Present System with Other PEM’s

An important characteristic of Eq. (13) is illustrated, if we write it in the form

CO
P(T ~ a) fiPi(T)
P""(a,T, Ma) = > |S. ae
» P(T) Ye fi Pi(T)
Here, P;(T’ ~ a)/P;(T) is the probability that T will have continuation a, in
view of PEM, Q;. This is the same as expression (12). Equation (14) is then a
weighted sum of the probabilities for the continuation a, as given by all possible

(14)

18

PEM’s. The factor f;P;(T) gives the weight of PEM Qj, and 1/ yet fj Pj (T)
is the normalizing factor for all of the weights.

It would seem, then, that if T is a very long string, P’” will make an
evaluation based largely on the PEM of greatest weight. This is because while
the f;’s are independent of T, P;(T) normally decreases exponentially as T
increase in length. Also, if Q; and Q,; are two different PEM’s and Q; is “better”
than Q,;, then usually P;(T)/P;(T) increases exponentially as T increases in
length. Of greater import, however, f;P;(T)/f;P;(T), which is the relative
weight of Q; and Qj, increases to arbitrarily large values for long enough T’s.
This suggests that for very long T, Eq. (14) gives almost all of the weight to
the single “best” PEM.

Here we define “best” using one of the criteria defined by McCarthy (1956),
i.e, PEM Q; is “better” than PEM Q; with respect to string T, if P;(Z) >
P;(T).

This suggests that for very long T’s, P’” gives at least about as good pre-
dictions as any other PEM, and is much better than most of them.

There are some arguments that make it plausible that P’” is a close approx-
imation to P’” of Eq. (11). If this is so, then it becomes likely that the PEM’s
of Sections 3.2 and 3.3 are also, for “sufficiently long T’s,” at least as good as
any other PEM.

It should be noted that the arguments used to suggest the superiority of P!’”
over other PEM’s is similar to that used in Section 3.1.2.3 for the plausibility
that P (of Eq. (1)) is largely machine independent for long enough T. Both
arguments are, of course, extremely informal, and are meant only to suggest
how a proof might possibly be found.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Many of the basic ideas on induction that have been presented are the out-
growth of numerous discussions over many years with Marvin Minsky.

Discussions with Roland Silver and James Slagle have been particularly im-
portant in the analysis of the properties of Turing machines. Criticism by Eu-
gene Pendergraft has resulted in a much more readable paper, has done much
to clarify the section on stochastic phrase structure grammars.

RECEIVED: May 24, 1962

REFERENCES

Carnap, R. (1950), “Logical Foundations of Probability.” Univ. of Chicago
Press.

Turing, A. M. (1937), On computable numbers, with an application to the
Entsheidungsproblem. Proc. London Math Soc. 42, 230-265.

19

Green, B.F., Jr. (1961), Computer languages for symbol manipulation. IRE
Trans. Electron Comp. EC-10, December No. 4. pp. 729-735.

McCarthy, J. (1956), A measure of the value of information. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 42, 654-655.

Chomsky, A.N. (1956), “Three Models for the Description of Language,”
IRE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. IT-2, No. 3, Sept. 1956, pp.
113-124.

Solomonoff, R.J. (1959), “A Progress Report on Machines to Learn to Trans-
late Languages and Retrieve Information,” Advances in Documentation and Li-
brary Science, Vol. III, pt. 2, pp. 941-953. Interscience, New York; AFOSR
TN-59-646 (Contract AF 49(638)-376); ZTB-134.

Solomonoff, R.J. (1960), “The mechanization of linguistic learning.” Proc.
Second Intern. Cong. Cybernetics, Namur, Belgium, September 1958, pp. 180-

193; AFOSR TN-59-246 (Contract AF 49(638)-376); ASTIA AD No. 212 226;
ZTB-125.

20
