INFORMATION AND ConTROL 10, 447-474 ‘(1967)

Language Identification in the Limit

E Marx Goip*

The RAND Corporation

Language learnability has been investigated. This refers to the fol-
lowing situation: A class of possible languages is specified, together
with a method of presenting information to the learner about an un-
known language, which is to be chosen from the class. The question
is now asked, ‘Is the information sufficient to determine which of the
possible languages is the unknown language?”’ Many definitions of
learnability are possible, but only the following is considered here:
Time is quantized and has a finite starting time. At each time the
learner receives a unit of information and is to make a guess as to the
identity of the unknown language on the basis of the information
received so far. This process continues forever. The class of languages
will be considered learnable with respect to the specified method of
information presentation if there is an algorithm that the learner can
use to make his guesses, the algorithm having the following property:
Given any language of the class, there is some finite time after which
the guesses will all be the same and they will be correct.

In this preliminary investigation, a language is taken to be a set of
strings on some finite alphabet. The alphabet is the same for all lan-
guages of the class. Several variations of each of the following two
basic methods of information presentation are investigated: A text for
a language generates the strings of the language in any order such that
every string of the language occurs at least once. An informant for a
language tells whether a string is in the language, and chooses the
strings in some order such that every string occurs at least once.

It was found that the class of context-sensitive languages is learn-
able from an informant, but that not even the class of regular lan-
guages is learnable from a text.

1. MOTIVATION: TO SPEAK A LANGUAGE
The study of language identification described here derives its motiva-
tion from artificial intelligence. The results and the methods used also

* Present address: Institute for Formal Studies, 1720 Pontius Ave., Los Ange-
les, California 90025. Present sponsor: Air‘Force Office of Scientific Research.
Contract F44620-67-C-0018.

447
Copyright © 1967 by Academie Press Inc.

448 GOLD

have implications in computational linguistics, in particular the eon.
struction of discovery procedures, and in psycholinguistics, in particulay
the study of child learning. These implications are discussed in Section 4,

I wish to construct a precise model for the intuitive notion “able to
speak a language” in order to be able to investigate theoretically how it
can be achieved artificially. Since we cannot explicitly write down the
rules of English which we require one to know before we say he can
“speak English,” an artificial intelligence which is designed to speak
English will have to learn its rules from implicit information. That ig,
its information will consist of examples of the use of English and/or of
an informant who can state whcther a given usage satisfies certain ruleg
of English, but cannot state these rules explicitly.

For the purpose of artificial intelligence, a model of the rules of usage
of natural languages must be general enough to include the rules which
do occur in existing natural languages. This is a lower bound on the
generality of an acceptable linguistic theory. On the other hand, the con-
siderations of the last paragraph impose an upper bound on generality;
For any language which can be defined within the model there must
be a training program, consisting of implicit information, such that it
it possible to determine which of the definable languages is being pre-
sented.

Therefore this research program consists of the study of two subjects:
Linguistic structure and the learnability of these structures. This re-
port describes the first step of this program. A very naive model of
language is assumed, namely, a language is taken to be a distinguished
set of strings. Such a language is too simple to do anything with (for
instance, to give information or to pose problems), but it has enough
structure to allow its learnability to be investigated as follows: Models
of information presentation are defined, and for each I ask “For which
classes of languages does a learning algorithm exist?”

In the second step of this program (Gold, 1966), which will not be
discussed here, nontrivial models of the usages of language are col
structed. The next step will be to return to learnability theory and de-
termine whether reasonable training programs exist for linguistic struc
tures of this type.

2, LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION MODELS

Appendix IT lists intuitive definitions of some of the terminology of
recursive theory used herein.
Let A be a finite set (the alphabet of the languages to be considered)

“ty
om

LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION IN THE LIMIT 449

and ZA represent the set of all finite strings of elements from A. A is
to be considered fixed throughout this paper. The results presented in
the next chapter are independent of the cardinality of A so long as it
is not void. A language L will signify any subset of SA. In an actual
language this may represent, for instance, the set of meaningful strings
of words,

A language learnability model will signify the following triple:

1. A definition of learnability.

2. A method of information presentation.

3. A naming relation which assigns names (perhaps more than one) to
languages. The “learner” identifies a language by stating one of its
names. The names could be called grammars.

Only one definition of learnability, which will be called identifiability
in the limit, will be considered here. Six alternative methods of informa-
tion presentation and two alternative naming relations will be considered,
making a total of twelve models of language learnability. The definitions
will now be given, and the results are stated in Section 3. The proofs
are in Appendix I. The basic ideas behind the proofs are described in
Sections 7 and 9. ;

Time will be taken to be quantized and start at a finite time:

t= 1,2,-:-

At each time ¢ the learner is presented with a unit of information ay
concerning the unknown language L. In any language learnability
model, the method of information presentation consists of assigning to
each L a set of allowable training sequences, 7%), 72, °*°

LearnaBriiry. At each time ¢ the learner is to make a guess g; of a
name of L based on the information it has received through time ¢.
Thus the learner is a function G which takes strings of units of informa-
tion into names:

ge = Ga, vee Ui).

L will be said to be identified in the limit if, after some finite time, the
guesses are all the same and are a name of L. A class of languages will
be called identifiable in the limit with respect to a given language learn-
ability model if there is an effective learner, 1.e., an algorithm for making
&esses, with the following property : Given any language of the class and
glven any allowable training sequence for this language, the language will
be identified in the limit.

For each of the 12 models of language learnability the following ques-

430 GOLD

tion has been investigated (the results are in the next Section): Which
classes of languages are identifiable in the limit? Note that identifiabil-
ity (learnability) is a property of classes of languages, not of mdividual
languages.

In the case of identifiability in the limit the learner does not neces-
sarily know when his guess is correct. He must go on processing informa-
tion forever because there is always the possibility that information
will appear which will force him to change his guess. If the learner were
required to know when his answer is correct (this is equivalent to “finite
identifiability” defined in Section 6), then none of the classes of lan-
guages investigated in the next chapter would be learnable in any of the
learnability models. My justification for studying identifiability in the
limit is this: A person does not know when he is speaking a language
correctly; there is always the possibility that he will find that his gram-
mar contains an error. But we can guarantee that a child will eventually
learn a natural language, even if it will not know when it is correct.

INFORMATION PRESENTATION. Two basic methods of information
presentation will be considered, ‘‘text” and “Gnformant.”? Three varia-
tions of each will be defined.

A text for L is a sequence of strings 21, t, °*° from L such that every
string of L occurs at least once in the text. At time ¢ the learner is
presented x, . Note that for any given language many texts are possible.
The three variations of this method of information presentation to be
considered are obtained by putting different restrictions on the class of
allowed texts:

1. Arbitrary Text: x, may be any function of t.

2. Recursive Text: x, may be any recursive function of &.

3. Primitive Recursive Text: x, may be any primitive recursive function
of t.

An informant for L can tell the learner whether any string is an ele-
ment of L, and does so at each time ¢ for some string y, . Three types of
informant will be considered; these differ in how the y, are chosen:
1. Arbitrary Informant: y; may be any function of £ so long as every

string of ZA occurs at least once.
2. Methodical Informant: An enumeration is assigned a priori to the
strings of DA, and yc is taken to be the ith string of the enumeration.
3. Request Informant: At time ¢ the learner chooses y: on the basis of
information received so far.
Naming ReLation. Two naming relations will be considered, “tester”

‘

|
|

LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION 1N THE LIMIT 451

and ‘“‘generator.” In both cases a name of a language, ic., a grammar,
will be a Turing machine: A fester for L is a Turing machine which is a
decision procedure for L, that is, the Turing machine defines the func-
tion from strings to natural numbers which has the value 1 for strings
in L and 0 for strings not in L. A generator for L is a Turing machine
which generates L, that is, it defines a function from positive integers to
strings such that the range of this function is exactly L. A tester exists
iff L is recursive and a generator exists iff L is recursively enumerable.

Two language learnability models will be called equivalent if exactly
the same classes of languages are identifiable in the limit with respect
to either model. Two naming relations will be called equivalent if, for
every method of information presentation, the two language learnability
models obtained by using these naming relations are equivalent. Sim}-
larly, two methods of information presentation will be called equivalent
if every naming relation yields two equivalent language learnability
models.

Suppose two naming relations are effectively intertranslatable. That
is, suppose there is an algorithm for each of the naming relations which,
given a name of a language in this naming relation, would yield a name
of the language in the other. Then these are equivalent naming relations.

It is well known that. it is possible to effectively translate from testers
to generators. Therefore, given any method of information presentation,
any class of languages which is tester-identifiable in the limit must also
be generator-identifiable in the limit. However, it is not possible to
effectively translate from generators to testers, even if we restrict our-
selves to recursive languages for which both are defined. Therefore,
it is possible for a method of information presentation to exist such that
a class of languages is generator identifiable in the limit but not tester
identifiable in the limit. An example of this is given in the next Section.
This subject is discussed further in Section 11.

The three variations of information presentation by informant are
equivalent. They are defined separately only in order to make this point.

3. LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION RESULTS

For every pair consisting of one of the 12 learnability models together
With one of the language classes listed in Table I it has been determined
Whether the class of languages is identifiable in the limit. The language
Classes are listed in descending order, i.e., each class is properly contained
in the class above it. The dividing lines between identifiable in the limit

452 GOLD

TABLE I

Divipineé LINES BETWEEN LeaRNABILITY AND
NoONLEARNABILITY OF LANGUAGES

Learnability model Class of languages

_

Anomalous text®
Recursively enumerable
recursive

Informant >
Primitive recursive
Context-sensitive
Context-free
Regular
Superfinite

Text >
Finite cardinality languages

eee

« Anomalous text refers to the use of the generator-naming
relation and information presentation by means of primitive
recursive text.

and nonidentifiable in the limit are shown in the table. The classes of
languages below the dividing line shown for a given model of language
learnability are identifiable in the limit with respect to this model;
those above the dividing line are not. It is possible to represent the
results by means of dividing lines in this way because of the following
obvious facts: If a class of languages is identifiable in the limit with
respect to a given language learnability model, then the same holds
for any subclass; if a class is not identifiable in the limit, then. the same
holds for any superclass.

In the table, “informant” refers to any of the three variations of in-
formant together with either the generator- or tester-naming relation.
That is, the same results have been obtained, so far, for each of the six
language learnability models which utilize an informant. Of the six
language learnability models which utilize a text for information presen-
tation, five of them have given the same results, shown as “text” in the
table. The remaining model, shown as “anomalous text,” is primitive
recursive text with the generator-naming relation.

A super-finite class of languages denotes any class which contains all
languages of finite cardinality and at least one of infinite cardinality.

The anomalous model using a text is of no practical interest, but
three noteworthy conclusions can be drawn from it: (1) It shows that

4

LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION IN THE LIMIT 453
restrictions on the order of presentation of elements of the text can
greatly increase the learnability power of this method of information
presentation. (2) Note that the difference between a text and an in-
formant is that a text only presents the learner with positive instances,
namely, elements of the language, whereas an informant presents both
positive and negative instances. Therefore, one would expect the in-
formant to be more powerful. However, “anomalous text” is more
powerful than any of the “informant” models, which shows that one
must carefully consider the details of the learnability model. (8) ““Anom-
alous text” shows that the choice of naming relation can make a dif-
ference since, in this case, the generator-naming relation is far more
powerful than tester.

4. IMPLICATIONS OF LANGUAGE LEARNABILITY RESULTS

To THE Stupy oF CHILD LEaRNING of LANGUAGE. Recently, psycho-
linguists have begun to study the acquisition of grammar by children
(e.g., McNeill, 1966). Those working in the field generally agree that
most children are rarely informed when they make grammatical errors,
and those that are informed take little heed. In other words, it is be-
lieved that it is possible to learn the syntax of a natural language solely
from positive instances, i.e., a “text.’? However, the results presented
in the last Section show that only the most trivial class of languages
considered is learnable (in the sense of identification in the limit) from
text, neglecting “anomalous text.” If one accepts identification in the
limit as a model of learnability, then this conflict must lead to at least
one of the following conclusions:

1. The class of possible natural languages is much smaller than one
would expect from our present models of syntax. That is, even if Eng-
lish is context-sensitive, it is not true that any context-sensitive Jan-
guage can occur naturally. Equivalently, we may say that the child
starts out with more information than that the language it will be pre-
sented is context-sensitive. In particular, the results on learnability
from text imply the following: The class of possible natural languages,
if it contains languages of infinite cardinality, cannot contain all lan-
guages of finite cardinality.

2. The child receives negative instances by being corrected in a way
We do not recognize. If we can assume that the child receives both posi-
tive and negative instances, then it is being presented information by an
“informant.” The class of primitive recursive languages, which includes

454 GOLD

the class of context-sensitive languages, is identifiable in the hmit from
an informant. The child may receive the equivalent of negative in-
stances for the purpose of grammar acquisition when it does not get
the desired response to an utterance. It is difficult to interpret the actual
training program of a child in terms of the naive model of a language
assumed here.

3. There is an a priori restriction on the class of texts which can occur,
such as a restriction on the order of text presentation. The child may
learn that a certain string is not acceptable by the fact that it never
occurs in a certain context. This would constitute a negative instance.

To ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE. The training program of an artificial
intelligence can certainly include an informant, whether or not children
receive negative instances. Therefore, the results of Table I show that a
learning algorithm can be constructed for the identification of primitive
recursive predicates on strings, which probably include all the predi-
cates children learn. However, for the purpose of efficiency it is still of
significance to determine what additional information may be available
to children, either in the form of an a priori restriction on the class of
predicates which can oecur in natural languages, or in the form of in-
formation which can be obtained from the order of presentation of
naturally occurring texts.

To THE CONSTRUCTION OF, Discovery Procepurss. Attempts have
been made to construct an algorithm for automatically generating 4
phrase structure grammar for a language solely by analyzing a text of
the language. One approach (Lamb, 1961) uses the ‘distributional
analysis” of Harris (1951, 1964) and Hockett (1958). Namely, one asso-
ciates phrases which are found to occur in the same context, thereby
defining phrase categories and simultaneously enlarging the set of con-
texts which can be considered equivalent; then one records how phrase
categories are constructed by concatenation of phrase categories.
Another approach which has been proposed (Solomonoff, 1964) uses
‘Gdentification by enumeration,” which is defined in Section 7.

These attempts suggest the question, “Is there enough information in
a text, even one of unlimited length, to allow the identification of a con-
text-free language?” The results presented in Section 3 show that it 38
impossible to construct a learning algorithm for the entire class of
context-free languages if the only information is an arbitrary text. If
one wishes to assume restrictions on the order of presentation of the
text, then a successful learning algorithm must be sensitive to the order

1

LANGUAGE ‘IDENTIFICATION IN THE LIMIT 455

of the text. Thus, statistical approaches such as distributional analysis
are not suitable for this purpose. However, it would be useful to deter-
mine if there are interesting subclasses of the class of context-free lan-
guages which can be identified in the limit by either of these approaches.

5. IDENTIFICATION OF FUNCTIONS AND BLACK BOXES

This Section is a summary of the results of a previous paper (Gold,
1965) which is devoted to the learnability of two types of objects other
than languages:

Time Function. At each time ¢, a time function produces an output, a
positive integer, which depends only on ¢. Formally, a time function is a
function of one variable which takes positive integers (time) into posi-
tive integers (outputs).

Back Box. A black box has provision for an input at each time, as
well as an output. Each output is determined by the inputs that have
previously been applied to the black box. More precisely, let an alphabet
here signify either a finite set with at least two elements, or else the set
of positive integers. Then a black box consists of the following triple:
An input alphabet J; an output alphabet O; a black box function
which takes input strings into the output alphabet, thereby determin-
ing the output at time f: 0, = b(4@, +++ , a).

Thus, a time function is a special case of a black box. In the case of a
time function, 0; depends only on ¢ and not on a previous input string.
A time function can be described as a black box with a degenerate input
alphabet consisting of one element.

Throughout the study of black box learnability, J and O are to be
considered as fixed alphabets, i.e., J and O are chosen a priori, and all
black boxes are to use these two alphabets.

In the case of time function learnability the following situation is
studied. The learner observes the successive outputs of a time function
and is to guess what function it is observing; that is, the learner consists
of an identity guessing algorithm G which yields a guess g, at each time
tas to the identity of the time function, g; being determined by the out-
puts which the time function has produced so far: g,; = G(01, +++ , 04).

In the case of black box identification, the learner consists of an ex-
Perimenting algorithm FE as well as an identity guessing algorithm G.
E determines the input which the learner will apply to the unknown
black box at any time as a function of the previous outputs of the black
box: 7, = E(o., +++, 0-1). The identity guessing algorithm makes a

456 GOLD

TABLE II

Divivinc LINES BETWEEN LEARNABILITY AND
NonLEARNABILITY FOR TIME FUNCTIONS AND
Buack Boxes

Type of object Class of objects

Recursive
Time functions-——-—-———__—_—_?
Primitive recursive
Black boxes >”
Finite automata

a

guess, at each time é, as to the identity of the black box: g, =
G01, «++, 08)

It is too much to require the learner to identify a black box in the
sense of finding its identity at the beginning of the experiment, ¢ = 1.
This is because, for instance, the black box may be such that the first
input which the learner applies to it may trap the black box in a subset
of its possible states, so that the learner will never be able to determine
what the behavior of the black box would have been if its first input had
been different. Therefore, only weak learnability will be considered;
namely, the learner will be asked to predict, at each time, the future
behavior of the black box. That is, the learner is to guess the present
black box function, rather than that att = 1.

Only one model of time function learnability and one of black box
learnability will be considered. The method of information presentation
for each model was described above. As in the models of language learn-
ability, in both of these models ‘“Jeamability” will signify ‘§dentifica-
tion in the limit.” The naming relation will be the following: The names
of a time function, or of a black box (actually, its black box function),
will be taken to be those Turing machines which compute it.

Three classes each of time functions and of black boxes have been
considered. Table II shows which of these are identifiable in the limit.
As in Table J, the classes are listed in descending order in Table I.
Finite automata time functions denote ultimately periodic functions.

6. ABSTRACT MODEL OF IDENTIFICATION

An identification situation consists of the following three items:

1. A class & of objects. One of the objects will be chosen, the learner
will be presented information about it, and the learner is to figure out
which one it is.

LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION IN THE LIMIT 457

2. A method of information pregentation. At each time ¢ the learner
receives a unit of information 7, which is chosen from a set [ . The method
of information presentation consists of specifying, for each w € 2, which
sequences of units of information, 7 » 22, +++, are allowable. Let the set
of allowable sequences be designated I°(w),

3. A naming relation. The learner is to identify the unknown object
by finding one of its names. A naming relation consists of a set N of
names and a function f which assigns an object to each name, f: N—> Q.

The identification problem is to determine whether there is a rule the
learner can use to accomplish the following: For any object w € Q
and for any information sequence from J “(w), on the basis of that in-
formation sequence the rule will yield a name n of w, that is, f(n) = a.
Three variations of the identification problem are the following, of
which only the first is considered in this paper.

Identification in the limit has made some appearances previously in
the pattern recognition literature (e.g., Aizerman et al., 1964). In this
case the learner is to guess a name of the unknown object at each time.
It is required that there be a finite time after which the guesses are all
the same and are correct. .

Finite identification is the type of identification problem usually
considered. It is best known in automata theory (e.g., Gill, 1961). In
finite identification, the learner is to stop the presentation of information
at some finite time when it thinks it has received enough, and state the
identity of the unknown object. This is not possible unless there is some
finite time at which the information distinguishes the unknown object.
That is, no other object satisfies the information.

Fixed-time identification. In this case the information sequence stops
after some finite time which is specified a priori and which is independ-
ent of the object being described. The learner is to then state the identity
of the unknown object.

Saying that a class of objects is identifiable in the limit implies not
only that a suitable guessing function G exists, but that it is effective;
that is, there exists an algorithm which computes it. The class of ob jects
will be called meffectively identifiable in the limit if a suitable G exists,
regardless of whether it is effective. Note that whether a class of objects
's ineffectively identifiable in the limit does not depend on the naming
Telation go long as every object has at least one name. This is because any
two naming relations are intertranslatable if we do not require translation
to be effective.

An identification situation will be said to satisfy the distinguishability

458 GOLD

condition if the I7(w) are disjoint; that is, if there is no information
sequence which describes two different objects.

An identification situation will be said to satisfy the collapsing un-
certainty condition if the following holds: For any information string
i, +++, tt, let &, denote the set of those objects which agree with the
information received so far, i.e., those such that [°(w) contains an
information sequence which begins 1, -**» i,. For any information
sequence, the Q; will be a descending sequence. The collapsing uncer-
tainty condition requires that, for any object » and any information
sequence of [°(w), the limit set of the 2, contains only w. That is, for
any w different from there is a time after which the information will
eliminate w , namely w € Qa.

7, METHODS OF IDENTIFICATION IN THE LIMIT

Identification by enumeration refers to the following guessing rule:
Enumerate the class of objects in any way, perhaps with repetitions.
That is, choose a function from the positive integers to the class of ob-
jects such that the range of the function is the entire class. At time t
guess the unknown object to be the first ob ject of the enumeration which
agrees with the information received so far, 1e., which is in Q;. This
guessing rule will be effective if the following two conditions hold: (1)
Given any information string 4, °"°, i, and any positive integer 2,
there is an effective method for determining whether the nth object of
the enumeration is in Q. (2) There is an effective method for finding 4
name of the nth object of the enumeration.

To be precise, ‘Gdentifieation by enumeration” refers to a class of
guessing rules, since there are many possible enumerations.

If we assume that I is countable, then any class of objects which is
ineffectively identifiable in the limit must be countable. This is because
the domain of the guessing function G, namely, finite strings of elements
of I, is countable.

Henceforth, it will be assumed that T and @ are countable, and that
every object has at least one name.

Turorem 7.1. For ineffective identifiability in the limit, the distinguish
ability condition 1s necessary and the collapsing uncertainty condition
sufficient. Indeed, the collapsing uncertainty condition implies thd
identification by enumeration gives ineffective identification in the Limil
for any enumeration. If I?(w) ts countable for every «, then the distinguis
ability condition is sufficient for ineffective identifiability im the limit.

Proor. Ineffective identifiability in the limit = distinguishabilit’

ee

LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION IN THE LIMIT 459
If the distinguishability condition does not hold, then there is an allow-
able information sequence which describes two different objects, so that
it is impossible to know which is the unknown object.

Collapsing uncertainty = identification by enumeration gives ineffec-
tive identification in the limit for any enumeration: The object to be
identified must occur somewhere in the enumeration. Let its first occur-
rence be at position n, There are at most n — 1 different objects before
this position in the enumeration. The collapsing uncertainty condition
implies that there is some finite time after which none of these prior
objects will agree with the information presented to the learner. After
that time the unknown object will be the first object of the enumeration
which satisfies the information received, and will therefore be correctly
guessed by the learner.

I°(w) is countable for every w, together with distinguishability => in-
effective identifiability in the limit. If we wish to identify the information
sequence, then the collapsing uncertainty condition always holds. Say-
ing that I°(w) is countable for every w is equivalent to saying that the
set of allowable information sequences is countable. In this case, iden-
tification by enumeration may be used to identify in the limit the in-
formation sequence being presented to the learner. The distinguishability
condition implies that one can translate (not necessarily effectively )
from information sequences to objects, and therefore to names of ob-
jects. Q.E.D.

Returning to the specific case of language identification, note that in-
formation presentation by informant satisfies the collapsing uncertainty
condition no matter what class of languages is considered. That is why
the class of primitive recursive languages is identifiable in the limit from
an informant; namely, an effective enumeration of the characteristic
functions of this class of languages exists thereby giving an effective
identification-by-cnumeration guessing rule (see Theorem I.4, Ap-
Pendix I),

Information presentation by text satisfies the distinguishability con-
dition for any class of languages, but it does not satisfy collapsing un-
certainty for any class of languages which contains two languages such
that one is a subset of the other.

The following guessing algorithm shows that the class of languages of
finite cardinality is identifiable in the limit from an arbitrary text:
Guess the unknown language to consist solely of the strings generated so
far by the text (see Theorem I.6).

To see that the entire class of recursively enumerable languages is

460 GOLD

identifiable in the limit from primitive recursive text using the generator.
naming relation (see Theorem I.7), note that the class of primitive ye.
cursive texts is effectively enumerable. Therefore, the text can be effeg.
tively identified in the limit using identification by enumeration. Since
the text is a generator for the language, this is all that is needed. This jg
an example of the method of identification described at the end of the
proof of Theorem 7.1.

8. INEFFECTIVE IDENTIFIABILITY IN THE LIMIT RESULTS

LANGUAGE IDENTIFIABILITY. If information presentation is by inform.
ant, then the collapsing uncertainty condition is satisfied, so that any
countable class of languages is ineffectively identifiable in the limit using
identification by enumeration. Of course, all the languages must have
names.

If information presentation is by recursive or primitive recursive text,
then, again, any countable class of languages is ineffectively identifiable
in the limit. This is because there are only a countable number of pos-
sible texts, so that the text can be identified in the limit by means of
identification by enumeration.

If information presentation is by arbitrary text, then the results for
ineffective identifiability in the limit are the same as for effective identi-
fiability in the limit; namely, the class of languages of finite cardinality
is ineffectively identifiable in the limit, but every proper superclass is
not. This can be proved by the same methods used to prove Theorems
1.6 and LS.

Time Function IpentiFIABILITy. The method of information presen-
tation in the model of time function learnability satisfies the collapsing
uncertainty condition. Therefore, any countable class of time functions
is ineffectively identifiable in the limit.

Buack Box Inentiriapiity. Any countable class of black boxes is
ineffectively (weak) identifiable in the limit. This can be proved by the
same method used to prove Theorems 9 and 10 in Gold (1965).

9. THE WEAKNESS OF TEXT

It is of great interest to find why information presentation by text is
so weak and under what circumstances it becomes stronger. Therefore,
it is worthwhile to understand the method used in Theorems IS and
1.9 to prove that any class of languages containing all finite languages
and at least one infinite language is not identifiable in the limit from 8
text in five out of six of the models using text.

LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION IN THE LIMIT 461

The basic idea is proof by contradiction. Consider any proposed guess-
ing algorithm. It must identify any finite language correctly after a
finite amount of text. This makes it possible to construct a text for the
infinite language which will fool the learner into making a wrong guess
an infinite number of times as follows. The text ranges over successively
larger, finite subsets of the infinite language. At each stage it repeats
the elements of the current subset long enough to fool the learner.

Thus, the method of proof of the negative results concerning text
depends on the possibility of there being a huge amount of repetition
in the text. Perhaps this can be prevented by some reasonable probabil-
istic assumption concerning the generation of the text. In this case one
would only require identification in the limit with probability one,
rather than for every allowed text.

I have been asked, “If information presentation is by means of text,
why not guess the unknown language to be the simplest one which ac-
cepts the text available?” This is identification by enumeration. It is
instructive to see why it will not work for most interesting classes of
languages: The universal language (if it is in the class) will have some
finite complexity. If the unknown language is more complex, then the
guessing procedure being considered will always guess wrong, since the
universal language is consistent with any finite text. This follows from
the fact that, if L is the unknown language and if L’ D L, then L’ is con-
sistent with any finite segment of any text for L. The problem with text
is that, if you guess too large a language, the text will never tell you that
you are wrong.

10. LEARNING TIME

Consider an identification situation which satisfies the collapsing un-
certainty condition. Choose an enumeration of the class of objects and
let. Gp be the identification-by-enumeration guessing rule which uses this
numeration. At first sight, identification by enumeration appears to be
4 naive approach to learning. However, it will be shown that G is the
Most efficient possible guessing rule with respect to learning time. This
holds even if ineffective guessing rules are allowed and if the enumeration
has duplications. This result is somewhat surprising in view of the fact
that there are many different identification-by-enumeration guessing
tules, obtained by using different enumerations. This means that none of
them is uniformly better than any other, in the sense defined below, for
the purpose of minimizing learning time.

462 GOLD

Let G be any guessing rule, » be any element of the class Q of objects
and 7 any information sequence allowed for w. Define the learning time
7(G, w, 7) to be the first time such that at that time and all following times
all the guesses of G as to the identity of will be the same and correct,
Define the learning time to be ~ if no such time exists.

Let G and G’ be any two guessing rules. G will be said to be uniformly
faster than G’ if the following two conditions hold: (1) Given any and
any allowable 7 for w, then G will identify w at least as soon as G@ will
identify w, that is,

7(G, 0,1) < 7(G’, @, 7).

(2) There is some wy and an allowable % for wo such that G will identify
wy sooner that G:

1(G, wy, TM) < 7(G@, wo, tr)

Turorem 10.1. If Go is an identification-by-enumeralion guessing rule,
then there is no guessing rule uniformly faster than GH.

Proor. This is what has to be proved: Let G be any guessing rule. If
there is an w and an allowable 7 for w such that @ is faster than Gp, ie.,
7(G, w, T) < 7(G, @, 7), then there is an w and an allowable 7 for w
such that G is faster than G, i.e., 7(Go , w,t) < r(G, w, 1).

G, is constructed in such a way that, once it guesses correctly, its
guesses never change. Therefore, if Gp is presented with the object » to
identify, by being given information sequence 7, then 7(Go, w, 7) is the first
time that Gp guesses the identity of the unknown object to be w. At the
earlier time, 7(G, w, 7), Go must guess the name of some other object, say
w'. At any time that Gp guesses the name of an object, that object must
agree with the information received so far. That is, at the time that Go
guesses w’ there must be an allowable 7’ for w such that 7’ is the same as
Z up to this time. Thus, if w’ were the unknown object and 7’ the informa-
tion sequence, then at that time, namely 7(G, w, 7 ), Gand Gp would make
the same guesses as they would if presented w and 7: Gp would guess
and G would guess w. That is, if presented with w and 7, Go would be
correct before G. Q.E.D.

Note that the proof of Theorem 9.1 remains valid even if Go does not
identify every object of the class in the limit and G does. It is only neces-
sary that, for every finite initial subsequence of every allowable informa-
tion sequence, there exist an object in the enumeration which is consistent
with it.

LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION IN THE LIMIT 463

il. TRANSLATION FROM GENERATORS TO TESTERS

The purpose of this Section is to use the results on language identifica-
tion in the limit presented in Section 3 to solve a problem in recursive
theory. In addition to the generator- and tester-naming relations, a third
method of assigning names to recursive sets, called domain generators,
ix defined below. Suzuki (1959) has shown that there is no effective
method for going from recursive sets, described by domain generators,
to their complements, described in the same way. This result will here be
strengthened in two ways: It will be shown that there is no 2-recursive
(defined below) translation of this type, and that, rather than the entire
class of recursive sets, one can restrict one’s consideration to any class of
sets which contains all finite sets and at least one infinite set without
changing this result. It has been pointed out to me by Norman Shapiro
that one can easily construct a 3-recursive translation from recursive
scts to their complements, using the domain generator-naming relation,
thus completely establishing the difficulty, in the Kleene hierarchy, of
this type of translation.

lor the purpose of this Section it is desirable to think of languages as
sets of positive integers, rather than sets of strings. This may be accom-
plished by means of any recursive one-to-one correspondence between
the strings of 2A and the positive integers.

Let Z,(x) be the number-theoretic function of one variable defined
by the Turing machine whose Godel number is n. The two naming rela-
tions for languages are defined formally as follows.

Generator. A generator for L is a positive integer n such that L is the
range of Z,(2).

Tester. A tester for L is a positive integer n such that Z,(2) = x L(x),
where xz is the characteristic function of L.

Tt will be assumed in this Section that in all naming relations the
haines are numbers.

Translation. Given two naming relations, N; and N»,a translation from
Ny to Ny isa partial, number-theoretic function f(m) such that, if n is a
hame of an object in Ny, then f(n) is defined and is a name of that object
in Ny,

Limiting recursive function. A partial, number-theoretic function f( n)
will be called limiting recursive if there is a total recursive “guessing
function” g(n, ¢) such that

f(n) = lim: g(n, 8), (10.1)

464 GOLD

where the limit of a sequence of positive integers is taken to be undefined
if the sequence is not constant after some finite point; otherwise the
limit is defined to be the value at which the sequence ultimately becomes
constant.

Turorem 10.1. If a class of objects 18 identifiable in limit using some
method of information presentation and using naming relation N,, and af
there is a limiting recursive translation from N, to naming relation Nz,
then the class of objects 1s identifiable in the limit using the same method of
information presentation and N2.

Proor. Let f(m) be a limiting recursive translation from N, to No,
and g(n, t) be a total recursive function such that Eq. (10.1) holds, and
let G, be a suitable guessing rule using Ni. Then a suitable guessing rule
using N2 is the following:

For a given information sequence, suppose that at time t the guess made
by Gi, is g:. Then, when using Nz, let the guess be g(g:, #). Call this
guessing rule ( -

To see that G2 is suitable note that, using Ni, there is a time &, after
which all the g, will equal a fixed value go, which is correct in N, .By
Eq. (10.1), there is a te such that, for allt 2 &,

f(go) = 9(go, t)- (10.2)

Therefore, for all times greater than 4 and t,, the guess of Ge will be
f(go), which is correct in N,. Q.E.D.

Consider language learnability with information presentation by
means of primitive recursive text. The results shown in Table I differ for
the two naming relations, generator and tester. This leads to the follow-
ing conclusion:

Corotiary 10.1. If C is a class of languages which contains all finite
languages and at least one infinite recursive language, then there is no limil-
ing recursive translation from testers for C to generators.

In order to compare this result with that of Suzuki, it is necessary to
define two more naming relations for recursive languages:

Domain generator. A domain generator for Lisa positive integer 7 such
that L is the domain of Z,(2).

Anti-domain generator. n is an anti-domain generator for L if it 1s 4
domain generator for the complement of L.

Representing predicate. For any partial number-theoretic function
f(n), its representing predicate P(n, m) will be defined to be true for just
those pairs (n, m) such that f(n) is defined and f(n) = m.

~

LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION IN THE LIMIT 465

h-Recursive function. A partial, nimber-theoretic function will be called
k-recursive if its representing predicate is k-r.e. (recursively enumerable)
in the Kleene hierarchy.

Note that the I-recursive functions are just the partial recursive
functions.

It is shown elsewhere (Gold, 1965) that the limiting recursive func-
tions are the same as the 2-recursive functions.

The strengthening of Suzuki’s result described at the beginning of this
chapter can now be stated formally:

THEOREM 10.2. If C is a class of languages which contains all finite
languages and at least one infinite recursive language, then there is no 2-re-
cursive translation from domain generators for C to anti-domain generators.

Proor. Theorem 10.2 follows from Corollary 10.1 together with the
following facts which can be proved by standard methods:

There is a partial recursive translation from testers to domain gener-
ators.

Given both a domain generator and an anti-domain generator for a
recursive set, there is an effective procedure for finding a generator for it.

Composition of 2-recursive and recursive functions yields 2-recursive
functions. Q.E.D.

12. INDUCTIVE INFERENCE

Concerning inductive inference, philosophers often occupy themselves
with the following type of question: Suppose we are given a body of
information and a set of possible conclusions, from which we are to
choose one. Some of the conclusions are eliminated by the information.
The question is, of the conclusions which are consistent with the in-
formation, which is “correct???

If some sort of probability distribution is imposed on the set of con-
clusions, then the problem is meaningful. But if no basis for choosing
between the consistent conclusions is postulated a priori, then inductive
inference can do no more than state the set of consistent conclusions.

The difficulty with the inductive inference problem, when it is stated
this way, is that it asks, “What is the correct guess at a specific time
with a fixed amount of information?” There is no basis for choosing
between possible guesses at a specific time. However, it ts interesting
to study a guessing strategy. Now one can investigate the limiting be-
havior of the guesses as successively larger bodies of information are
Considered. This report is an example of such a study. Namely, in in-

466 GOLD

teresting identification problems, a learner cannot help but make errors
due to incomplete knowledge. But, using an “‘identification in the limit”
guessing rule, a learner can guarantee that he will be wrong only a
finite number of times.

Recelvep: February 20, 1967

REFERENCES

AIzERMAN, M. A., BRAVERMAN, E. M., anp Rozonoer, L. I. (1964). Theoretical
foundations of the potential function method in pattern recognition. Auloma-
tion and Remote Control 25, 821-837 and 1175-1190.

Git, A. (1961). State-identification experiments in finite automata. Information
and Control 4, 182-154.

Goup, E Marx (1965). Limiting recursion. J. Symb. Logic 30, 28-48.

Gow, E Marx (1966). ‘‘Usages of Natural Language.” Informal report available
from the author at Institute for Formal Studies, 1720 Pontius Ave., Los
Angeles, California 90025.

Harris, ZELLIG (1951). “Methods in Structural Linguistics.” Univ. of Chicago
Press.

Harris, ZELUIG (1964). Distributional structure. In ‘‘The Structure of Language”
(J. A. Fodor and J. J. Katz, eds.). Prentice Hall, New York.

Hocxert, C. F. (1958). ‘‘A Course in Modern Linguistics.”’ Macmillan, New York.

Lamp, SypNEY, M. (1961). On the mechanization of syntactic analysis. In ‘1961
Conference on Machine Translation of Languages and Applied Language
Analysis’? (National Physical, Laboratory Symposium No. 18), Vol. II, pp.
674-685. Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, London.

McNeILL, Davin (1966). Developmental psycholinguistics. Part of the chapter
“Psycholinguistics’”’ by George Miller and David McNeill to appear in the
“Handbook of Social Psychology.”

SoLomonoFr (1964). A formal theory of inductive inference. Information and
Control 1, 1-22 and 224-254.

Suzun1, Y. (1959). Enumeration of recursive sets. J. Symb. Logic 24, 311.

APPENDIX I
Proors oF LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION RESULTS

It ean be shown by standard methods that there is a recursive transla-
tion from testers to generators. Thus, Theorem 10.1 gives

Turorem I.1. Given any method of information presentation, if @ class
of languages 1s identifiable in the limit using the tester-naming relation,
then it is identifiable in the limit using the generator-naming relation.

Corotnary 1.2. Given any method of information presentation, yf a

class of languages 1s not identifiable in the limit using the generator-naming

LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION IN THE LIMIT 467
relation, then it is not identifiable in the limit using the lester-naming rela-
tion.

Turorem 1.3. Arbitrary informant, methodical informant, and request
informant are equivalent methods of information presentation.

Proor. Identifiability from arbitrary informant > identifiability from
methodical informant => identifiability from request informant: The first
implication follows from the fact that an identity guessing algorithm
which will work for any informant will obviously work for the special
case of a methodical informant. The second follows from the fact that the
learner can ask a request informant for methodical information.

Identifiability from request informant => identifiability from arbitrary
informant: Suppose we have an identity guessing algorithm suitable for a
request informant and we are faced with an arbitrary informant. What-
ever information our learner wishes to request at some time, an arbitrary
informant is required to provide it eventually. We can modify our learner
so that it will wait until it receives the information it currently desires be-
fore it makes its next guess. Q.E.D.

The previous five theorems and corollaries compare the methods of
information presentation and the naming relations for language identifica-
tion. These results, together with the following six theorems, yield the
language learnability results presented in Table I.

As in Section 10, it will be desirable to think of languages as sets of
positive integers, rather than of strings. However, here it will be neces-
sary to achieve this by means of a primitive recursive one-to-one cor-
respondence, so that primitive recursive sets of strings will be taken into
primitive recursive sets of positive integers and vice-versa.

Treore 1.4. Using information presentation by methodical informant
and the lester-naming relation, the class of primitive recursive languages IS
identifiable in the limit.

Proor. There is an effective enumeration of the primitive recursive
functions of one variable, that is, a total recursive function Dalz) of two
variables such that the class of pp is the class of primitive recursive func-
tions. Define w(a) to be the function which takes 1 into 1 and all other
values of x into 0. Then wp,(2) is an effective enumeration of the char-
acteristic functions of the primitive recursive languages. Let L, be the
language whose characteristic function is Wpn - It willnow be shown that
identification by enumeration using this enumeration of the primitive
Tecursive languages is effective. First it must be shown that, given any

468 GOLD

information sequence up to time t and any n, it can be effectively deter-
mined whether L, satisfies this information sequence. The information
sequence will tell us, for each x from 1 through f, whether z is an element
of the unknown language L. The fact that wpa(a) isa recursive 2-place
function implies that we can effectively determine the desired informa-
tion, namely, whether or not each x from 1 through ¢ is an element of L, .
Now it only remains to show that a tester can effectively be found for
L,, . This follows from the well known result of recursive theory that, for
any recursive 2-place function wpn(x), there is a total recursive function
(n) such that

Zem(&) = Wprl@); (1.1)

that is, @(7) is a tester for Tn -

THEOREM 1.5. Using information presentation by methodical informant
and the generator-naming relation, the class of recursive languages IS NOT
identifiable in the limit.

Proor. Let G be an effective identity guessing rule for methodical
informant which correctly identifies in the limit every finite language and
the complement of every finite language. A recursive language L will be
constructed for which the guesses of G will change an infinite number of
times.

The information sequence for L will be a semi-infinite sequence of 0’s
and Vs: %1, 42, °°* » where = 1ifte Li, = Of 0 L. An effective
rule will be given for constructing this sequence. The construction will
proceed in steps. If at the beginning of a step of the construction the
construction has so far produced 41, -°* > i, , then at the end of the step
the information sequence will have been extended to be of the form

iy -tt yin O71’, (1.2)

where a’ denotes a b-long string of a’s. An effective procedure will be
given for choosing © and y which will guarantee that the guess made by
G at the end of string 1.2 will be different from the guess made earlier, at
the end of the information string

iy, ott yin, O- (1.3)

It is only necessary to show that a pair (2, y) with this property exists,
because then such a pair can be effectively found as follows: Meth-

LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION IN THE LIMIT 469

od

odically search all pairs of positive integers until such a pair is found.
That one can effectively determine, for any pair, whether it has the de-
sired property follows from the fact that G is effective.

Let L, be the language whose information sequence is

ty, +++ tn, 0°, (1.4)

where a” denotes the semi-infinite string a, a, --- . Since Z, is a finite
language, if G is presented with this information sequence it must, after
some finite time, continually guess a generator g; for L,. Letn + x bea
time at which G guesses g; .

Let Ly be the language whose information sequence is

ip, ++, tn, 0%, 1. (1.5)

Since Ly is the complement of a finite language, if G is presented with
this information sequence, there must be a time n + x + y at which G
guesses a generator go for Ly . Since g; and gs must differ, this shows the
existence of a pair (2, y) with the desired property. Q.H.D.

THEOREM I.6. Using information presentation by arbitrary text and the
tester-naming relation, the class of languages of finite cardinality IS identa-
fiable in the limit.

Proor. The information sequence 7, , %2, «++ will be a sequence of posi-
tive integers, the range of which is the unknown language L. A suitable
identity guessing algorithm is the following: At time ¢, guess L to consist
solely of the numbers which have occurred so far in the information
sequence. Since L is finite, there will be a finite time after which all ele-
ments of L will have occurred in the information sequence, so that the
guesses will be correct. It is a straightforward but tedious exercise to
show that there is an effective method for finding a tester for the language
which consists of 4%, --- , 7:. Q.E.D.

TuHroreM 1.7. Using information presentation by primitive recursive
text and the generator-naming relation, the entire class of r.e. languages IS
identifiable in the limit.

Proor. As in Theorem I.4, let p,(x) be an effective enumeration of the
primitive recursive functions. The information sequence % , 72, --- will
be the same as the sequence pn(1), pn(2), --- for some n. Such an n can
be effectively identified in the limit by using identification by enumer-
ation. That is, the text describing the unknown language L can be identi-
fied in the limit. Since pu(v) is @ recursive function of two variables,

470 GOLD

there is a total recursive function ¢() such that
Zem(t) = Pal®); (17)

that is, ¢(n) is a generator for L. Q.E.D.

Trrorem 18. Using information presentation by recursive text and the
generator-naming relation, any class of languages which contains all finite
languages and at lease one infinite language L 1S NOT identifiable in the
limit.

Proor. We may assume that L is r.e. since, otherwise, it would not
have a generator and the theorem would follow immediately. It can be
shown by straightforward methods that there is a recursive sequence of
positive integers a1, d2,°"° which ranges over L without repetitions.
Suppose Gis an effective identity guessing rule which identifies generators
for all finite languages in the limit from recursive text. A recursive text
for L will now be constructed which will cause G to change its guess an
infinite number of times. This text will be of the form

As in the proof of Theorem 1.5, this text will be constructed in steps. Let

At the beginning of the nth step, the desired information sequence will
have been constructed through time lon». During the nth step, Y=
and to, will be effectively chosen in such a manner that the guess made
by G at time tr will differ from that at time fn. AS in the proof of
Theorem L.5, it is sufficient to show that such a pair (tena, an) exists.
Let 7, signify the desired information sequence through time ¢, . The
information sequence

in, py 00+ = Tena) Gnt (1.10)
is a recursive text for the finite language
Ty = {a ,-** 5 Gn}. (1.11)

Therefore, there is an L2n-1 such that at time én_1 the guess made by @
Will be a generator for L, . Similarly, the information sequence

on , te 7° Ven—1 , Gen (1.12)
is a recursive text for the finite language
Ly = {a1, +++ 5 Gan}, (1.13)

LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION IN THE LIMIT 471
ed
which is different from L, . For a layge enough ate, the guess made by G
at time f, will be a generator for L,, which cannot be the same as a
generator for Ly . Q.E.D.

THEOREM 1.9. Using information presentation by primitive recursive
text and the tester-naming relation, any class of languages which contains
all finite languages and at least one infinite language L IS NOT identifiable
in the limit.

PROOF BY CONTRADICTION. An information sequence 71 , %, --- is here
a sequence of positive integers. A guessing rule consists of a computable
function G which determines the guess g; at time ¢ as a function of the
information received by the learner through f:

ge = Ga, +++, a). (1.14)

In the terminology of Gold (1965), G determines a limiting recursive
functional whose domain is information sequences. It is shown in
Theorem 5 of that reference that any limiting recursive functional can
be defined by means of a primitive recursive guessing function. It will be
assumed that G' is primitive recursive. It will also be assumed that L
is recursive since, otherwise, Z cannot be tester identified and the conelu-
sion of the theorem is immediate. Let f(z) be a primitive recursive func-
tion with a range equal to L.

A primitive recursive text 7, will be constructed which contradicts the
assumption that @ is a suitable guessing rule. A function X, will also be
defined. Let P, and Q, signify the following predicates:

P, = [f(X.) = dl --- vif(X.) = t] (1.15)
Q: = (Ay S {Thee , (X), yl & [U(y) = O]}, (1.16)

where 7'(a, x, y) is the primitive recursive predicate which says that the
Turing machine with Gédel number a, if presented with x as an input,
will stop after performing the computation with Gédel number y; and
Uy) isa primitive recursive function such that, if y is the Gédel number,
of a Turing machine computation, then U (y) is the number it produces
at its end.

; 7: and X, are simultaneously defined by course-of-values recursion as
ollows:

il

Il

X;=1 (1.17)
f(1) (1.18)

a

472 GOLD

Xen = X, +1 if Pr (1.19)
= X, if AP; _ (1.20)
leat = SCX) if AP, and Q, (1.21)
= otherwise. (1.22)

The idea behind the construction is this: 7, is designed to generate L,
but very slowly. After a finite number of elements of L have been
generated, v1, --- , 21, if 7, repeats z, long enough the guessing pro-
cedure will have to guess a decision procedure for the set {a1 , --- , 2,,
which must reject 2-41. As soon as g; is known to reject 241, % starts
producing it. Q; implies Z,,(241) = 0, where 41 = f(X,). The details
follow.

Case I. 4 P, holds for only a finite number of ¢. It will be shown that this
implies that Rng(f) is finite. Let P, hold for allt 2 a. Then, by in-
duction,

by (1.19)] t>a = X,=Xe+(t—a)
[by (1.22)] ty = te

[by (1.15)] f(Xe) © {tes th.

Thus,

Case II. -P, holds infinitely often, but Q; holds for only a finite
number of . It will be shown that Rng(i,) is finite, but if g—> a, then there
is an x € Rng(i,) such that Z,(%) ¥ 0. Choose a large enough so that
4Q, holds for all £ = a. Induction on Eq. (1.22) gives

t% = 7%, forall t = a. (1.28)
Thus,
Rng(t:) = {a , met, ta}.
Let 8 be large enough that
>
pee (1.24)

IV
cos)

gi =a forall ¢
4P, holds. (1.25)

LANGUAGE IDENTIFICATION IN THE LIMIT 473

Induction on Eqs. (1.20) and (1.15) ‘gives, using (1.25) and (1.23),
X, = Xs forall i = 6
S(Xs) © {try +, tal.
Let tc = f(Xg). Now (1.16). (1.24), and (1.26) give
a(Ay S$ t){T(a,z,y) & Uly) = 0} forall ¢ = 8.
Thus,

(1.26)

Zia(z) #0.

Case ITT. Q, holds infinitely often. It will be shown that Rng(i;) =
Rng(f); but if g: >a, then there is an x such that x € Rng(f) and
Z.(2) = 0. Let a satisfy

gc =a@ forall t 2a.
Let 8 = « such that Q¢ holds. Set
w= f( Xp).
Then Qs gives Z.(2) = 0.
Rng(t%) = Rng(f) will be shown by -contradiction. We know, by
(£18) and (1.21), that

fC) € Rng(is) © Rng(f).

Let 2 be the lowest number such that

J(X) € Rag(%)
(1.19) and (1.20) show that X; is monotone increasing and either takes
on all values, or is ultimately constant.

Case IITA. X, = Xq for allt = a. Then (1.19) and (1.20) show that
-P, holds for i 2 a. By the assumption in Case III, there is a B > a
such that = Pg and Qs. (1.21) shows that zg. = f(X,). Then Ps41 holds,
since Xg41 = Xg by the assumption of Case IIIA.

Case IIIB. a is the last t such that X, = X. Then, by (1.19), P. must
hold, ice.,

f( Xa) € Rngli;). QED.

APPENDIX II
Derinrtions oF SoME OF THE TECHNICAL TERMINOLOGY

Turing machines are a special class of algorithms which are precisely
defined, so that they can be investigated mathematically, but are be-

474 GOLD

lieved to be perfectly general in the following sense. Given any compu-
tational rule which we would intuitively accept as an effectively defined
algorithm, the function defined by this algorithm is also defined by some
Turing machine. The recursive functions are those functions which can
be defined by Turing machines. The inputs to a Turing machine may be
considered to be either strings or positive integers, and the same is true
of its outputs.

The primitive recursive algorithms are a special class of algorithms which
are not general in the sense of Turing machines, but are general enough
to include all algorithms ordinarily constructed. Primitive recursive
functions are functions which can be defined by primitive recursive
algorithms:

A decision procedure for a language L is an algorithm defined on strings
such that the result of using the algorithm is 1 or 0, depending on whether
the string it starts with is an element of J or not. A generator for L is an
algorithm which takes positive integers into strings such that the range of
the function it determines is exactly L.

L is called recursively enumerable (1.e.) if there is a generator for it,
recursive if there is a decision procedure for it, primztive recursive if there
is a primitive recursive decision procedure for it, and regular if there is a
decision procedure for it which can be computed by a finite state
automaton.
