1508.01278v3 [stat.AP] 16 Aug 2015

arXiv

‘Teaching Statistics at Google Scale*

Nicholas Chamandyt Omkar Muralidharan? Stefan Wager’

August 18, 2015

Abstract

Modern data and applications pose very different challenges from those of the
1950s or even the 1980s. Students contemplating a career in statistics or data science
need to have the tools to tackle problems involving massive, heavy-tailed data, often
interacting with live, complex systems. However, despite the deepening connections
between engineering and modern data science, we argue that training in classical
statistical concepts plays a central role in preparing students to solve Google-scale
problems. To this end, we present three industrial applications where significant

modern data challenges were overcome by statistical thinking.

1 Introduction

Technology companies like Google generate and consume data on a staggering scale.
Massive, distributed data present novel and interesting challenges for the statistician,
and have spurred much excitement among students, and even a new discipline: Data
Science. Hal Varian famously quipped in 2009 that Statistician would be “the sexy job
in the next 10 years” (Lohr, 2009), a claim seemingly backed up by the proliferation
of job postings for data scientists in high-tech. The McKinsey Global Institute took a
more urgent tone in their 2011 report examining the explosion of big data in industry
(Manyika et al., 2011). While extolling the huge productivity gains that untapping such
data would bring, they predicted a shortage of hundreds of thousand of “people with

deep analytical skills”, and millions of data-savvy managers, over the next few years.

“This article is derived from a talk presented at the Joint Statistical Meetings on August 5, 2013, in
Montreal, during the session entitled Toward Big Data in Teaching Statistics.

*N. C. is a Data Scientist at Lyft.

40. M. is a Statistician in Ads Quality at Google.

8S. W. is a Ph.D. Candidate in Statistics at Stanford University.

Massive data present great opportunities for a statistician. Estimating tiny experimen-
tal effect sizes becomes routine, and practical significance is often more elusive than
mere statistical significance. Moreover, the power of approaches that pool data across
observations can be fully realized. But these exciting opportunities come with strings
attached. The data sources and structures that a graduating statistician (or data scien-
tist) faces are unlike those of the 1950s, or even the 1980s. Statistical models we take for
granted are sometimes out of reach: constructing a matrix of dimensions n by p can be
pure fantasy, and outliers are the rule, not the exception. Moreover, powerful computing
tools have become a prerequisite to even reading the data. Modern data are in general
unwieldy and raw, often contaminated by ‘spammy’ or machine-generated observations.

More than ever, data checking and sanitization are the domain of the statistician.

In this context, some might think that the future of data science education lies in en-
gineering departments, with a focus on building ever more sophisticated data-analysis
systems. Indeed, the American Statistical Association Guidelines Workgroup noted the
“increased importance of data science” as the leading Key Point of its 2014 Curriculum
Guidelines (ASA, 2014). As Diane Lambert and others have commented, it is vital that
today’s statisticians have the ability to “think with data” (Hardin et al., 2014). We agree
wholeheartedly with the notion that students must be fluent in modern computational
paradigms and data manipulation techniques. We present a counter-balance to this nar-
rative, however, in the form of three data analysis challenges inspired by an industrial
‘big data’ problem: click cost estimation. We illustrate how each example can be tack-
led not with fancy computation, but with new twists on standard statistical methods,

yielding solutions that are not only principled, but also practical.

Our message is not at odds with the ASA’s recent recommendations; indeed, the guide-
lines highlight statistical theory, “flexible problem solving skills”, and “problems with a
substantive context” as core components of the curriculum (ASA, 2014). The method-
ological tweaks presented in this article are not particularly advanced, touching on well-
known results in the domains of resampling, shrinkage, randomization and causal in-
ference. Their contributions are more conceptual than theoretical. As such, we believe
that each example and solution would be accessible to an undergraduate student in a
statistics or data science program. In relaying this message to such a student, it is not
the specific examples or solutions presented here that should be stressed. Rather, we
wish to emphasize the value of a solid understanding of classical statistical ideas as they
apply to modern problems in preparing tomorrow’s students for large-scale data science

challenges.

In many cases, the modern statistician acts as an interface between the raw data and the

consumer of those data. The term ‘consumer’ is used rather broadly here. Traditionally

it would include the key decision-makers of a business, and perhaps the scientific research
community at large. Increasingly, computerized ‘production’ systems—automated deci-
sion engines that are critical to a company’s success—may also be counted among the
consumers. Leaning on this framing, we see that difficulties may arise in all three phases

of data science: the input phase, the inference phase, and the output phase.

Section 2 highlights some challenges posed by the input or data retrieval phase. We
describe a common paradigm for data reduction and some of the constraints it imposes,
and then show how we can overcome the resulting engineering difficulties with a targeted
use of the bootstrap. In Section 3 we present a concrete modeling problem made more
difficult by the scale of the data, and discuss how to judiciously simplify the problem to
alleviate the computational burden without needlessly reducing the quality of inference.
Section 4 considers the output phase—specifically, the situation where the output of a
statistical model is piped directly into a production system. We frame this in terms of a
causal inference paradigm, highlight a problem which may result, and propose a remedy.
In addition to providing evidence for the value of statistical analysis in modern data
science, we also hope that these examples can provide students with an idea of the kind

of problems that modern industrial statisticians may be confronted with.

2 Sharding, MapReduce, and the Data Cube

Many new challenges in statistics arise from the size and structure of modern data
sources. Here we focus on difficulties caused by a sharded architecture, where pieces of
the data are stored on many different machines (or shards), often in a manner determined
by system efficiency rather than ease of analysis. Such architectures usually arise when
we need to work with data sources that are too large to be practically handled on a
single machine. In practice, the sharding happens far upstream of any data analysis;
the statistician typically has no control over which pieces of data are stored on which

machines.

One common procedure for reducing massive data to a smaller form amenable to inference
is the MapReduce framework (Dean and Ghemawat, 2004). A detailed description of
MapReduce is beyond the scope of this paper; however we give a brief overview in Section
2.1 below.

At a high level, MapReduce lets us create (multi-way) histograms of our data. This
computational architecture makes computing some functionals of the data easy, while
other functionals are more difficult to get. For example, if x € R!°, then computing E[z]

is easy, but computing the number of pairs of observations that are exact duplicates of

User population

queries

Server 1

Server logs
(raw data)

Map phase

Reduce
phase

Figure 1: A stylized example of a Google data stream. Every user-generated query is
processed by one of K servers, with different queries from the same user possibly hitting
different servers. The servers write raw data to logs, one record per query. These records
are first processed by M mapper machines, whose output is shuffled along the key of
interest & and mapped in order to J reducer machines. The data are further processed
by the reducers into a single summary tuple for each unique value of k. These data are
finally analyzed by the statistician. Typically, K > M > J.

each other is hard. As statisticians, we need to express the primitives on which we base

our inferential procedures in terms of queries that are feasible with MapReduce.

2.1 Computing with Map Reduce

Here, we follow the exposition of Chamandy et al. (2012), who consider a basic instance
of MapReduce; reproduction of a stylized diagram of the system is provided in Figure
1. The internals of MapReduce are less important to this discussion than the sort of
data that the program takes as input and spits out at the other end as output. The
input can in general be petabytes (10!°B) of sharded, unstructured or hierarchical data
objects (such as machine-generated log files). The output is typically a flattened table
of key-value tuples of aggregated statistics.

Most MapReduce jobs run in just a few hours (or less). In its simplest form, the MapRe-

duce network consists of a single master machine, which coordinates the process, and

many mapper and reducer machines. The system is fully parallel in that there is no
communication among mappers nor among reducers (though there is some limited com-

munication between the two groups, and both communicate with the master).

During the map phase, each mapper processes its set of input records, which may them-
selves be complex non-vector objects, and produces an intermediate tuple by applying
some aggregation function. The tuples are different from the final output because they
have been computed from only a subset of the data, and must be further combined.
These intermediate data are then sorted by their key and sent as input to the reducers, a
process known as shuffling. In the reduce phase, each reducer machine further aggregates
its own input tuples to produce a final statistic for every unique key. The resulting data,
which are of a manageable size, can then be downloaded from the MapReduce network
and interrogated using R, SQL, and other such tools. Their final structure is what is
known as a data cube: a set of key-value pairs where the key is a possibly high-cardinality
categorical vector, and the value is a highly aggregated numeric vector. For example,
in a Google Search application, the key might be the cartesian product of all countries,
languages, web browser versions, types of computing device, and hours of day. The value

might contain aggregated statistics like the number of queries and clicks in each bin.

2.2 Example: Variance estimation with big data

In the context of MapReduce, uncertainty estimation can be challenging, even for rela-
tively rudimentary statistics. The reason is that the record used for sharding and storing
the data rarely coincides with the unit of analysis, i.e., the smallest unit for which an in-
dependence assumption can be made. Therefore, computing exact second-order statistics
like sums of squares is impossible without expensive communication between machines

in the network.

Consider the following example. We work for a pay-per-click advertising platform (such
as Google), and wish to estimate the average cost per ad click paid by advertisers over
some collection of search queries in different countries. We get to measure the cost of
clicks, each of which can be attributed to a user who is in one of the countries of interest.
Specifically, let Yj. denote the cost of the i-th click of the u-th user in the country c.
Finally, suppose that the “record units” are clicks, meaning that each click is stored
separately, and there are no guarantees about whether any pair of clicks may or may not

be on the same shard. All clicks are not, in general, independent.

Although the data may be massive, obtaining a simple point estimator for the mean

country-wise cost per click is easily accomplished using MapReduce, with sums as the

aggregation functions, clicks and spend as the values, and country as the key. Writing
N- for the total number of clicks in country c, we can estimate our parameter of interest
as
6.= Y.c/Ne, where Y.. = S— Yine- (1)
i,u
As statisticians, however, we are rarely satisfied with a simple point estimate 6, and also
want a measure of the stability of this estimator. And this is where the details of the

MapReduce implementation become important.

Given that the data are stored at the click-level, we can easily compute a naive variance

estimate using MapReduce,

1 A
s=+ (+yry2,-6), (2)

1,U

by simply tacking on a sum of squared click costs, Y2_., to the value tuple. More explicitly,

que?
when mapping over a given click, the MapReduce program first determines its country,

say c, followed by its cost Yiue, and then emits the tuple (1, Yiuc, Y;,2,) to the entry of a
summation aggregator with country key c. The variance estimator S$? would be justified

under the assumption that all click records in the data are independent.

In general, however, the estimator S? is biased, because the true “experimental unit” is
something coarser than the click. In particular, S? will fail to account for the (usually
positive) correlation between the cost of successive clicks from the same user. In a
typical computing architecture, we can easily get around this issue by computing user-

level variances:

ya Me\" 1 Ze 627: where Zuc= SY; 3
c ~ TV, No My | 2s Zie ] — 86 ps where w= DY (3)

and M, is the number of unique users in country c. The problem is, the individual Yjx.

comprising user u’s total cost Z,- are not usually on the same shard, and so we need
to compute a separate MapReduce query to get each Z,,. (or key our aggregators by w).
Thus, to compute (3), the size of the output returned by MapReduce would need to scale
as the number of users in the system. As the number of users is almost as large as the

number of clicks, this is computationally prohibitive.

2.3. The Poisson bootstrap

Perhaps surprisingly, however, it turns out that we can side-step the engineering problem
of how to compute V2 with a statistical idea. Although V2 itself is difficult to compute,
we can produce a MapReduce-friendly alternative to it using a variation of the bootstrap
(Efron and Tibshirani, 1993). The key trick is to replace multinomial bootstrap sampling

with Poisson sampling, which can be implemented while streaming over the data.

More specifically, recall that bootstrap procedures draw a sequence of resamples which
can be viewed as weighted versions of the original sample. The idea behind the Poisson
bootstrap is to use Poisson weight vectors instead of multinomial weight vectors, since
the former can be generated on-the-fly without knowing the sample size, while the latter
cannot. The method works as follows. To construct B replicates of the output tuple
from a MapReduce, B independent Poisson(1) random variables are drawn for each
record in the data, as the record is processed. Given a record belonging to a statistical
unit with the unique identifier u, the random number generator for replicate b is seeded
with g(h(w) + b), where g and h are two fingerprint functions!. This procedure ensures
that any two records originating from the same unit will have identical Poisson vectors.
The b-th Poisson variable represents a count of how many times the unit is to appear in

replicate b.

If there are n total units, the sample size of any Poisson bootstrap replicate is not
fixed, but rather a random variable distributed as Poisson(n). Nevertheless, the Poisson
bootstrap is asymptotically equivalent to the traditional multinomial bootstrap, and to
streaming analogues of related resampling techniques (Chamandy et al., 2012). These
ideas have been studied by, among others, Hanley and MacGibbon (2006), Lee and Clyde
(2004), and Politis et al. (1999).

2.4 Illustration with Google data

Figure 2 illustrates this problem with Google data, by showing standard errors for average
click cost in 234 countries. The data are normalized so that estimates are displayed
relative to V. (3), which is based on an i.i.d. user assumption.” As we might have feared,
the naive variance estimates S? (2), which assume that clicks are ii.d., are badly biased

downwards. We also include an intermediate estimator computed from an i.i.d. query

‘A fingerprint function f, as used here, is a mapping of arbitrary data into the space of 64-bit
integers. It is virtually 1-to-1, so that collisions are extremely rare (but not impossible). Moreover,
knowing f(x1), f(x2),..., f(an), for some arbitrary collection of points 71, ..., @n, gives no information
about the relationship between those data points.

?Computing V. for this problem required using a very expensive data join, which would not be feasible
as a part of a routine data-processing pipeline.

V, (i.i-d. users)

NX | e Se (i.i-d. clicks)
— . i.i.d. queries
A Poisson bootstrap

mA
A, 4 a “a A

fo) AA, ad ay re VON
RR ORON NTS toy rove ere ee
= . aa au ve, Pat a ro ton Au
Co) oon a smal ts 1 en
ne) . 8 got Seer ta aw amu a a | uo
Sa im . ne "T om” q . .
sO | . tt} 2° aren” al s
s a er ha] os" e a8
2 a* 4° 0° cnece ° we
® e °°? eo °o ond, %. e.°

5 over, we oy g “ermre Se oP geme o & nee e
oete ie eo. “oo ye se of 038% a e @ eco *
=° e ee. ee e e Co cco e e, e e
> e e° ©?¢ ° e e e @e * e
fs) e ° e rad e

= Py e °.
es a ° % cS e
xe} e

o e
£
n

0.2

0.0

Standard error, i.i.d. users (log scale)

Figure 2: Estimated standard deviation of average click cost in 234 countries. Stan-
dard errors are computed relative to the computationally prohibitive independent-user
estimator V. (gold line and x-axis, on a log scale). Assuming that all clicks are i.i.d.
leads to S., which underestimates uncertainty (green dots). So does, to a lesser extent,
assuming that all queries are i.i.d. (pink squares). The gold standard V, is fairly well-
approximated in this example by applying the Poisson bootstrap with 1000 replicates
(purple triangles).

model; in general, a query should be thought of as a set of actions comprising a single task
that may include many clicks. Such a model is tractable in certain applications; query-
level sharding, as depicted in Figure 1, is not uncommon. Accounting for the within-
query correlation helps, but the i.i.d. query estimator still underestimates uncertainty

on the standard error scale by about 10%.

Poisson bootstrap standard errors using B = 1000 replicates are also displayed in Figure
2. They are quite close, at least in expectation, to the gold standard V. computed from a
“random user” model—that is, using between-user sums of squares. This is as expected,
since the bootstrap procedure assumes that users are the independent units of analysis.

Thus, the Poisson bootstrap has successfully provided us with a computationally efficient

way of estimating the variance of 6. using MapReduce.

3. The Long Tail

Large data sets are notorious for having long-tailed occurrence distributions: many units
occur infrequently, but together, these infrequent units account for a large fraction of
total events. For example, Google advertisers have collectively input millions of keywords
into their advertising campaigns. These keywords are a targeting mechanism—they allow
the advertiser to indicate a desire to show an ad when the user’s search query contains
the specified terms. But most Google ad keywords are only seen a small number of times.
Because of this, when doing statistical analysis of such long-tailed data, the number of
units of interest scales with the amount of data collected. This creates computational

challenges for traditional statistical methods.

3.1 Example: Cost per click modeling

Suppose we are interested in predicting the average cost per ad click on each keyword.
Such a prediction model might serve a number of purposes: classifying query strings into
commerciality bins, estimating the revenue that will be generated by a new ad campaign,
etc. Some of these uses may entail memory or computational constraints, for example if

the model will be used as part of an online serving system.

As a simple version of this, we might want to fit a linear mixed effects model of the form
log (ad click cost) ~ country + query category + (1|keyword) ,

where ‘query category’ refers to some coarse classification of query strings into topics
like Home and Garden, Finance, Arts and Entertainment, and so on. Here we have
expressed the model using an R 1me4-style model formula (Bates et al., 2014). The
response variable is ad click cost on the log scale. The last term on the right-hand-side
denotes a simple keyword random effect, i.e., a different mean 0 random offset for every
keyword. The fixed effects of country and query category are assumed to be constant
across all keywords. This may be overly simplistic if a query category encompasses a
diverse set of products, but is a reasonable first attempt. More sophisticated random

effects models are of course possible but don’t fundamentally change the problem.

For convenience, we can fit the model in two stages: first, fit a coarse model without

the keyword effect; and second, analyze the residuals to estimate keyword-level random

effects. Fitting the coarse model is easy—a straightforward regression on categorical
predictors with which any undergraduate statistician should be familiar. The sufficient
statistics are also particularly simple: total clicks and log cost for each combination
of country and query category. These statistics are not only easy to compute using
MapReduce, but also easy to work with afterward, fitting nicely in memory (as long as

there aren’t too many query categories).

Next, we need to analyze the keyword-level residuals. This is where the challenge lies.
There are many keywords, most of which are extremely rare. Intuitively, though, the
rare keywords are not completely useless. Ideally, we would like to be able to ‘borrow
strength’ from the distribution of keyword effects when estimating parameters for any
given keyword. This is the key idea behind shrinkage estimators. In a second MapReduce
step, one can easily apply the first stage model and even collect keyword-level residual

statistics; for simplicity, a count, mean and sample variance.

Ignoring the uncertainty in the variances, the random effects problem then reduces to
that of estimating a vector of normal means. Suppose each keyword k has a true effect jug.
We observe a noisy sample mean residual R;,,, with true variance o7 inversely proportional

to its frequency:

ue ~ N(0,n7)
On, ™ G

Ri\Mes ok ~ N (Mes oR)»

where G is an unspecified prior on the keyword-level standard deviations. We want to

estimate juz, based on Rg and ox.

We could choose to treat all keywords equally. But for most applications, it is more
important to perform well on frequent keywords. Therefore, our loss function must be
weighted by frequency (or inverse variance). This is no different from treating every
unique instance of a keyword as a separate observation. The appropriate squared-error
loss is then

L£(u, ft) = > Lx (uf) = D5 (ue — fix)? oR: (4)
k

k

We wish to minimize risk, that is the expected loss E[L (, /«)] averaged over the priors.
Assuming known 7 and o7’s, this is achieved by using the Bayes estimator (Lehmann

and Casella, 1998), i.e. the posterior mean

E (ux|Re, o%)

10

This estimator shrinks the observed average residuals towards 0 (the prior mean). For

the k-th keyword, the Bayes estimator has risk

(un — E (Wx|Re, on)” /on
[ Var( Le| Ris on) /o%|
[1° /(o% +07°)]

[Te / (1+ 7e)],

Reayes =

E
E
E
E

where t = 77/ of is the signal to noise ratio, and the last expectation is taken over G.
This estimator minimizes our loss function, but it is computationally expensive. Not
only does it require computing statistics for all keywords, but more importantly storing
a coefficient for each keyword if we wish to make predictions from the model. The latter
would be especially problematic in an online setting, where speed and memory are at a
premium. Nevertheless, this ‘long tail’ problem gives a hint as to how we might proceed.
In practice, we often wish to make predictions for examples we have never before seen,
corresponding to T, = 0 and therefore ji, = 0 (there is no signal, only noise). Intuitively,
making a prediction for cases we have only observed once or twice, of which there may

be millions, is a qualitatively similar task.

3.2 Pruning rare units

The Bayes-optimal approach described above spends its computational resources unwisely—
it uses the same amount of memory (one coefficient) for each keyword. This is wasteful
since the rare keywords are less important in the loss function, and their effects are
harder to estimate anyway. Nevertheless, the Bayes estimator is a clear improvement on
our prior knowledge. Compared to simply plugging f/ = E(yz,) = 0 into (4), it reduces
the k-th term in our risk by

E{L4(1,0)] — E [Le (ut, E(uex| Re-ox))] = E [Pere Ne eal)

Oj

a

ao? \n? +02

k\” k
Tk

=E .

(5)

Recall that 7, is proportional to the frequency of keyword k. For rare keywords, Ty, is

small, so the Bayes estimator is only a small improvement over the prior in such cases.

This suggests an obvious strategy: compute the Bayes estimate for common keywords,

and use the prior for rare keywords. This can be implemented by running a MapReduce

11

to find keywords for which 7; is bigger than some threshold 7’, gathering data for these
keywords (either in the same MapReduce or in another one), and using the truncated
estimator

2
— SR, tT >T

fix = 5 7 (5)
0 Th <T

A similar calculation shows that for keyword k, the risk of this estimator is

Tk
rune = E —— (1 1 T .
Rane = E (7 (14nd (<P)

The truncated estimator is often nearly as good as the Bayes estimator. Clearly, Rtpunc <
(1+ T) Rpayes- If most keywords are rare and only a few occur frequently, 7 is concen-
trated near 0, making 71 {7 <T} small and Rtjunc close to Rgayes- Also, since even a
small T is usually enough to eliminate a huge number of keywords, the truncated esti-
mator can perform nearly as well as the Bayes estimator while using a small fraction of
the keywords. A nice side-benefit in online applications is that (5) provides us with an

initial click cost estimate even for keywords that we have never before observed.

Extensions of similar pruning ideas to more general contexts such as regression and
optimization have been considered by, among others, Duchi et al. (2010), Langford et al.
(2009), and McMahan et al. (2013). Of course, in a real application 7 and G, and even
perhaps the prior mean, would be unknown. While a classical Bayesian might hazard an
educated guess at these, perhaps bolstered by diagnostic checks, in the big data regime
one can do better. Empirical Bayes provides a framework for estimating these parameters
from the data (Casella, 1985; Efron, 2010). While these ideas are especially powerful
in a big data setting, they are surprisingly underrepresented in typical undergraduate

curricula.

3.3. Simulation study

Figure 3 illustrates with a simulation study how the truncated estimator described in the
previous section can offer attractive performance-computation tradeoffs. We generated
oj from a log-normal distribution G with sd (log (o,)) = 1.5, and set 7 = E (1/07) =1.
The far right shows that if we keep all the data, the truncated and Bayes estimators
are the same, SO Rtrunc/RBayes = 1. As we increase the threshold T’, we start filtering
out keywords, and move left on the plot. Rtrunc/RBayes rises, but slowly—we can keep
just 10% of the data and perform only 7.5% worse than the Bayes estimator. Finally, as

we start discarding informative keywords, Rtrunc/RBayes explodes and we perform much

12

5+

o &
1 fl

Loss / Bayes Loss

Po
1

1 4
0.001 0.010 0.100 1.000
Fraction of data kept

Figure 3: Simulated loss incurred by the truncated estimator in the rare keyword exam-
ple, relative to Bayes loss, for different occurrence thresholds T. The x-axis indicates the
fraction of all keyword effects estimated (i.e., P[7 > T]). By estimating only 10% of the
random effects, and discarding the rest of the keywords, we perform about 7.5% worse
than optimal while obtaining an order-of-magnitude computational savings.

worse than the Bayes estimator.

4 Statistical Feedback

In traditional applications, both academic and industrial, statistical models or inference
procedures tend to be of a ‘throw-away’ nature. A model is fit and a parameter estimated,
or a decision is made under uncertainty, and the result is communicated to the relevant
stakeholders. Typically, the statistician’s job ends there, and the model or inference is
unlikely to be revisited except if improvements to the methodology are desired, or in

rare follow-up or meta analyses.

In this section we describe a scenario where the output of a sequentially-run statistical
procedure is at risk of being used by one or more of its consumers in a way that could
be damaging to the inference itself. Such use is typically not malicious, nor can it really

be termed abuse; nonetheless it may have unintended side-effects.

13

4.1 Example: Query classification in ads serving

Suppose that we have built a statistical classifier to predict whether a search query
has commercial intent. Our goal is to use the predictions from our “commerciality”
classifier for stratified data analysis, forecasting query growth, or some other such offline
application. These predictions are updated by periodically collecting feature data over
some time window, but not by retraining the model itself (or by retraining it only very
rarely); the reason for this is that fitting our commerciality model is costly as it requires

collecting hand-labeled training data and curation by a statistician.

In this example, we chose to use expected click cost, i.e., the output from the model in
Section 3, as a feature in our classifier. If we were operating in isolation, this choice would
be completely innocuous. However, if we share the output of our classifier with other
teams, feedback loops can emerge. For example, suppose that another team—the ads
serving engineering team—hears of the existence of our model for predicting commercial
intent, and wants to exploit that signal in their own algorithms. Perhaps, for example,
they wish to search for more candidate ads on queries that they deem to be highly
commercial. If our model is logistic regression and produces probabilities Y; = P [query
i is commercial], this may correspond to situations where Y; > p, for some threshold p.
Alternatively they may wish to fetch a set of candidates whose size is proportional to
the odds of Y.

On the surface, such uses of our model are entirely reasonable. The problem is, if the
other engineering team uses our signal in a way that changes the expected click cost, then
our model may get biased by feedback. For example, take a query for which our model
predicts a large probability, either correctly or because of some prediction error. The
serving system may suddenly begin to fetch more candidate ads for this query, increasing
auction pressure and leading to higher average click costs. Since we haven’t retrained
our classifier in the interim, this increase in click cost will be taken by the model as
evidence that the query is even more likely to be commercial than previously thought.
This effect can worsen in successive time periods. On the other hand, a query for which
we erroneously predict a small Y may be disfavoured in serving, pushing down click cost

and reinforcing our misguided belief that the query lacks commercial intent.

4.2 Detecting feedback with noise injection
Although feedback itself is an engineering problem, detecting feedback is a statistics

problem. Perhaps the most difficult part of getting a handle on statistical feedback is

to define precisely and quantitatively what we mean by feedback. Here, we follow the

14

approach of Wager et al. (2014), and frame the problem in terms of the Rubin Causal
Model (Rubin, 2005) and counterfactual model predictions.

More specifically, let Y;* (0) denote the predictions we would have made for the i-th item
(query, say) in time period ¢ if there hadn’t been any feedback, i.e., the prediction that
our model would make if the engineering team never began using it in production. Other
counterfactual predictions are indexed by the prediction deployed in the previous period:
Yi yy denotes the time t + 1 model prediction, in a system with feedback, given that
y! was the prediction for item i produced at time ¢t. Given this notation, we define the

feedback at time ¢+ 1 on item 7 as a difference in potential outcomes,
feedbacki = Yi iy — Ya), (6)

i.e., the difference between the prediction the system in fact made, and the prediction it

would have made were there no feedback.

In order to use the formalism (6) in practice, we need to restrict the kinds of feedback we
seek to detect. Our first assumption is that feedback is Markovian, i.e., that feedback} is
conditionally independent of Y;, wey yy, given Y}. Second, we assume that the feedback

is additive, i.e., that it does not depend on y+ gy conditional on Yj.

Given these two assumptions, we can define a feedback function

fy) =E [Ys Ym | Yh = 9) (7)

=E beeen -Y/"@|Y¥f=y, Yi", Yi... ¥ot}. (8)

The goal of our analysis is to estimate this feedback function f(-). The principal challenge
in doing so is that it is not possible to simultaneously observe the two sets of predictions
represented by the two terms on the right-hand side of (7), namely Yi iy and YT).

The solution we proposed in Wager et al. (2014) involves secretly injecting a noise term
vi into the prediction at time ¢. The intuition behind this approach is that it creates
a sort of synthetic randomized experiment, allowing us to estimate the average causal
effect f(y) of feedback. Noise injection is related to the idea of instrumental variables
(Angrist et al., 1996) in the sense that, once we have injected this artificial noise into
the system, we analyze its effect on the system just like we would in an instrumental

variables regression.

For simplicity, consider the case where feedback enters into the model linearly

Yi" = Yt! + OY, and so f(y) = Oy. (9)

15

This model is rather unlikely to hold in reality, but it admits a simple analysis. Note
that the formulation (9) implicitly assumes that all the randomness in the system has
been absorbed into Ya).

Now, in order to detect the feedback, suppose that we start secretely deploying noisy
predictions Y;! +! instead of Y; in serving at time ¢. In other words, we never tell other
engineering teams what the raw value Y; produced by our predictor is, and only give
them access to the noised-up quantity Y;} +v'. Any feedback mechanism must now act

through these noisy predictions, and so the relationship (9) becomes

Yi pte = Vio + f (VE + v1) (10)
= V+) + OY! + ort. (11)

Here, both the new model predictions y+ Y{+v‘] and the noise terms vj are observed.
Thus, since v7 is independent of all other quantities on the right-hand side of (11) by
construction, we can estimate 0 from (11) using simple linear regression of Yelp

on v’.

Under this recipe, the precision with which we estimate the feedback slope is a ratio of
the variance of the noise we have injected to the variance of the noise inherent in our
prediction model:

nVar(0) = Var (V1) / Var(v). (12)

There is a clear tradeoff. Adding more noise improves our ability to measure feedback,
but of course it degrades the quality of the published predictions that will be used in
production. More details pertaining to (12), and extensions of this idea to general non-

linear feedback functions, are considered in Wager et al. (2014).

Having an estimate of 6 or, more generally, f(-), can be useful in several ways. First,
merely detecting non-zero feedback can alert us to emerging problems and help us identify
“rogue” uses of our published signals Y;. More ambitiously, we could also try to do a
post hoc feedback correction. For example, in the case of linear feedback, we could use
an estimate 6 to generate sanitized predictions yt det Yi yesut] = a(t + v4); our

simulation experiments below use this correction.

4.3. Simulation study
To illustrate this technique, we simulate from a simplistic setting: linear feedback in a

linear model. This allows us to demonstrate concretely how the randomization procedure

might be carried out in ideal circumstances, and even to approximately remove the

16

offending feedback once we’ve detected it.

We start with the following true underlying model:
Yj =a+6Xi+eé, & ~N(0,0°). (13)

We assume that enough data is collected when we train the model at t = 0 so that a
and 8 can be taken as known (since the interesting source of error is in the feedback,
not in the estimation itself). We imagine that we must make n weekly predictions for a
full year before our next opportunity to retrain the model; i.e., T = 52. The predictors

X are generated as follows:
XP = XP + 77, (14)

where
XP" = Xj) + OY + Gi, & ~ N(0,7"). (15)

Thus the predictors vary across time even before the feedback occurs, in a way that
may depend on the true value of Y. Combining (13) and (14), it can be seen that the
feedback function is f(y) = 6y with 0 = ¥8.

Given a set of simulated predictions Y; at time t, we first add noise v! ~ N(0,w7). We
then generate a new set of Xs from (14), but with Y/ +? in place of Y#. Next we
perform the regression of X'*!|yt4v+] on v'. The coefficient of v’ from this regression

is our estimate of 7, call it 4“+!. We then compute the corrected prediction
Yi} = 8 (xP ti — a +8), (16)

again ‘deploy’ the noised-up version yj*t + yet and iterate until t = T.

Note that in this example the variables and predictions grow in expectation across time.
Therefore, in Figure 4 we plot the relative root-mean squared error of our estimator,
defined as

R(t) = (EU — NPE?) (17)

as a function of time. We allowed the standard deviation of the injected noise, w, to

vary, while fixing the remaining parameter values: 6 = 1,0 = 1, y = 0.8, 6 = 0.15,
T=1,n=10°.

The general effectiveness of the procedure, along with the tradeoff inherent in the choice
of w, is evident from the curves in Figure 4. With w = 0.1, early predictions have about

as much error as naive predictions; this error decays quickly but rather noisily. Noise

17

0.8

— No adjustment

\ — w-=0.1
\ @=0.7
- @=1.3
\
o
ro) \
Ww
oO
= jm ee eee eee ee ee ee oe
ox
Zo
&
o)
ao
N
fo)

Time

Figure 4: Simulated relative root-mean square error across 52 time points for linear
feedback in a 1-predictor linear model. If no adjustment to our predictor is made,
feedback causes an asymptotically (in time) constant amount of error in our predictions
(green dashed line). The remaining lines show the error obtained by injecting normal
noise of different standard deviations w, and then using it to remove an estimate of the
feedback from X before making a new prediction.

with w = 0.7 seems about right for this problem. When we inject too much noise, e.g.
w = 1.3, we begin with poor predictions and don’t really make up for it with more

stability at larger t.

5 Conclusions

In this paper, we described three sub-problems within the broader context of click cost
estimation for paid web search. By no means have we presented an exhaustive list
of methodological challenges awaiting the modern industrial statistician. Rather, we
have chosen the problems to highlight a few distinct ways in which modern data and
applications differ from traditional statistical applications, yet can benefit from careful

statistical analysis.

In the first problem, uncertainty estimation was nontrivial because the types of second-

18

order statistics that statisticians normally take for granted can be prohibitively expensive
in large data streams. The second problem, which centered around building a fine-
grained prediction model, explored the gains that are possible by judiciously chopping
off the long tail of a massive data set. Finally, Example 3 highlighted the importance
of protecting one’s methods from unexpected uses, in an environment where product
decisions driven by statistical models can feed back inconspicuously into the inference
procedure. All three problems initially appeared to be straightforward and amenable
to standard methods, until a technical wrinkle presented itself. In each case, it was
primarily through careful statistical reasoning, and not by designing some heavyweight

engineering machinery, that we were able to arrive at a solution.

In doing so, we drew upon ideas that have been around for at least four decades—
and in some cases much longer. Over that time, these methods have been taught to
undergraduate students with an eye to small data problems. It is increasingly important,
in light of the rapid growth of available data sources, to modernize classroom examples
so that graduating students are not shell-shocked by their first encounter with big data.
Likewise, data-based simulation techniques should be emphasized as a proving-ground
for methodology before applying it naively to a billion data points. Early exposure to
tools like MapReduce can help build confidence, but frankly, a newly-minted statistician
with “deep analytical skills’ should have no trouble learning such things on the job.
As we have argued, it remains as critical as ever that we continue to equip students
with classical techniques, and that we teach each and every one of them to think like a

statistician.

Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Amir Najmi, Hal Varian, and three anonymous reviewers
for their many helpful suggestions. We would also like to thank Nick Horton, Jo Hardin

and Tim Hesterberg for encouraging us to write the manuscript.

References

J. D. Angrist, G. W. Imbens, and D. B. Rubin. Identification of causal effects using
instrumental variables. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91(434):444—
455, 1996.

D. Bates, M. Machler, B. Bolker, and S. Walker. Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models
using Ime4. ArXiv e-prints, June 2014.

19

G. Casella. An introduction to Empirical Bayes data analysis. The American Statistician,
39(2):83-87, 1985.

N. Chamandy, O. Muralidharan, A. Najmi, and S. Naidu. Estimating uncertainty for

massive data streams. Internal technical report, Google, 2012. [link].

J. Dean and S. Ghemawat. MapReduce: Simplified data processing on large clusters. In
Proceedings of the 6th Symposium on Operating Systems Design & Implementation,
pages 137-149, 2004.

J. Duchi, S. Shalev-Shwartz, Y. Singer, and A. Tewari. Composite objective mirror

descent. In Conference on Learning Theory, 2010.

B. Efron. Large-Scale Inference: Empirical Bayes Methods for Estimation, Testing, and
Prediction. Cambridge University Press, 2010.

B. Efron and R. Tibshirani. An Introduction to the Bootstrap. CRC press, 1993.

J. A. Hanley and B. MacGibbon. Creating non-parametric bootstrap samples using

Poisson frequencies. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 83:57-62, 2006.

J. Hardin, R. Hoerl, N. J. Horton, and D. Nolan. Data Science in the Statistics Curricula:
Preparing Students to “Think with Data”. ArXiv e-prints, October 2014.

J. Langford, L. Li, and T. Zhang. Sparse online learning via truncated gradient. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 10:719-743, 2009.

H. K. H. Lee and M. A. Clyde. Online Bayesian bagging. The Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 5:143-151, 2004.

E. Lehmann and G. Casella. Theory of Point Estimation. Springer Verlag, 1998. ISBN
0387985026.

S. Lohr. For today’s graduate, just one word: Statistics. The New York Times, 2009.
link].

J. Manyika, McKinsey Global Institute, M. Chui, B. Brown, J. Bughin, R. Dobbs,
C. Roxburgh, and A.H. Byers. Big Data: The Next Frontier for Innovation, Com-
petition, and Productivity. McKinsey Global Institute, 2011. URL https://books.
google.com/books?id=vN1CYAAACAAJ.

H. B. McMahan, G. Holt, D. Sculley, M. Young, D. Ebner, J. Grady, L. Nie, T. Phillips,
E. Davydov, D. Golovin, et al. Ad click prediction: A view from the trenches. In Pro-
ceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery
and data mining, pages 1222-1230. ACM, 2013.

20

D.N. Politis, J. P. Romano, and M. Wolf. Subsampling. Springer Series in Statistics.
Springer New York, 1999.

D. B. Rubin. Causal inference using potential outcomes. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 100(469):322-331, 2005.

S. Wager, N. Chamandy, O. Muralidharan, and A. Najmi. Feedback detection for live

predictors. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2014.

American Statistical Association Undergraduate Guidelines Workgroup. 2014 curriculum
guidelines for undergraduate programs in statistical science. Alexandria, VA: American
Statistical Association, 2014. [link].

21
